The Wish-Fulfilling King of Great Might A Universally Beneficial Prayer, Aspiration, and Supplication to the Three Jewels and Three Roots
With my three doors in a state of one-pointed and unshakable faith, I prostrate to and take refuge in you, the victorious buddhas of all times and directions, together with your heirs. Grant your blessings that we might free ourselves and every other sentient being from saṃsāra’s ocean of suffering, and thus fully manifest everlasting bliss—the noble state of a complete and perfect buddha!
Namo . Three Jewels and Three Roots, every single victor,
Abundant with love for beings, vast as space,
Shine bright your sunlight upon the profound path,
For we are mired in the darkness of our ignorance!
O peerless teacher, Lord of the Sages,
And all the past tathāgatas as well as those to come:
Please consider us with your love and kindness;
Let the blessed rain of your compassion fall upon us all!
oṃ mune mune mahāmunaye svāhā
O Prajñāpāramitā, supreme mother of the victors,
Essence of all scriptures of the nine-staged vehicles:
Please consider us, with your love and kindness;
Let the blessed rain of your compassion fall upon us all!
tadyathā | oṃ gate gate para-gate para-saṃ-gate bodhi svāhā
O Mañjuśrī, Vajrapāṇi, and Avalokiteśvara,
And the noble assembly of the victor’s heirs:
Please consider us with your love and kindness;
Let the blessed rain of your compassion fall upon us all!
oṃ maṇi-padme hūṃ hrīḥ
Great Guru of Uḍḍiyāna, king and disciples, Marpa and Mila,
All of you glorious root and lineage masters:
Please consider us with your love and kindness;
Let the blessed rain of your compassion fall upon us all!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma siddhi hūṃ
Kālacakra, Vajrasattva, Cakrasaṃvara, and Hevajra,
And the assembly of yidam deities of the four classes of tantra:
Please consider us with your love and kindness;
Let the blessed rain of your compassion fall upon us all!
oṃ vajrasattva hūṃ
Lord Bernakchen and Rangjung Gyalmo, 1
The Five Kings 2 , and the assembly of dharmapālas and ḍākinīs
Please consider us with your love and kindness;
Let the blessed rain of your compassion fall upon us all!
oṃ śrī-vajra-ḍāka-ḍākinīye svāhā
In brief, may all beings of the three realms and five classes,
Ourselves and others, whether enemies, friends, or strangers,
Be protected by these unfailing sources of refuge
From now on, throughout all our lives to come.
May the results of each of these pure aspirations,
Through the unfailing power of the truth of cause and effect,
Spark a blaze of glorious virtue, both temporal and sublime,
That will entirely empty all of saṃsāra’s triple realms.
We thereby dedicate the entire accumulation of merit throughout the three times, gathered by ourselves and all beings, to the objects of compassion: the six classes of beings in general, but especially those who disregard the laws governing actions and their results. May all be swiftly freed from the ripening of negativity, and may we easily attain perfect liberation!
tadyathā | pañcendriyāvabodhanīye svāhā