Net of the Illusory Display The Root Sādhana from the Heart-Essence of the Deathless Lake-Born Vajra I. The Preliminaries A. Taking Refuge B. Rousing the Bodhicitta of Aspiration and Application C. The Seven Branches D. Giving the Preliminary Torma E. Visualizing the Protection Circle F. Making Wisdom-Resplendence Rain Down G. Consecrating the Offering Substances II. The Main Part A. The Generation Practice Inviting the Wisdom Beings B. The Stages of Accomplishment Homage, Offerings, and Praise The Awakened Intent of the Mantra Recitation C. Applying the Activities The Feast Offering Between Sessions Consecrating the Gathering Substances Inviting the Field of Accumulation Offering the First Portion The Second Offering for Confessing Broken Samayas Finally, Performing and Offering the Liberation Offering the Residuals Proclaiming to the Guardians the Pledges They Made in the Past Nurturing the Tenmas with the Rinsing Water Concluding the Activities with the Vajra Dance III. The Concluding Stages A. Receiving the Siddhis B. Confessing Mistakes C. The Practice of Dissolution D. Eliminating the Extreme of Nihilism E. Dedicating the Merit F. Making Aspirations G. Making Prayers for Auspiciousness
To the deathless Three-Root deities, I prostrate.
Namo. In the Lake-Born Vajra of self-awareness,
Embodiment of the Three Jewels and Three Roots,
I and all beings, from now until awakening,
Take refuge beyond meeting and parting.
Hoḥ. To attain buddhahood for others’ sake,
I will engage in the two-stage yoga.
I will rouse awakened heart within luminous space
To free the three realms beyond existence and peace.
Hoḥ. To the deathless deities of the Three Roots,
I prostrate with unwavering respect.
I make offerings—outer, inner, and secret.
All misdeeds, obscurations, and downfalls, I confess.
In all awakened conduct, I sincerely rejoice,
And I entreat you to turn the Dharma wheel.
Do not pass into nirvāṇa, but remain, I pray.
I dedicate all virtue to the essence of dharmadhātu.
Hūṃ. You, obstructing spirits of deluded projection,
Take this torma of boundless sensory delights!
It is the expression of infinite purity.
Take it and disperse into natural, innate space!
hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ
Hrīḥ. Present as the deity, from my heart centre
Light shines out in all directions,
And the vajra protection circle spontaneously appears,
Utterly impenetrable by dualistic fixation.
oṃ vajra jñāna rakṣa hūṃ bhrūṃ
Hūṃ hrīḥ. From the palace of space-awareness unity,
Come forth, deathless deities of the three roots!
Confer empowerment here, bestow your resplendence,
And grant the supreme and common siddhis!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru deva ḍākinī sarva samaya ābeśaya a āḥ | hrīm hrīm pem pem | hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ. This site is the Lotus-Arrayed Land of Great Bliss,
A pure realm of boundless proportions.
In its center are the outer, inner, and secret sense delights,
All perfect and complete as the vast offering mudrā.
oṃ sarva pūja āḥ hūṃ
Aḥ. The basic space of ground is ever-pure suchness.
In times gone by, in the earliest aeon,
The appearances of ground, natural compassion’s expression,
Spontaneously arose as the wisdom forms and pure realm
Of the land of Uḍḍiyāna in the northwest—
A manifest island amid an ocean of blood,
An enchanting place filled with wondrous sights,
A landscape of utter beauty to behold.
There, in a lake of eightfold-pure water,
Upon the anthers of a lotus flower in the center,
Atop a sun- and moon-seat of means and insight,
Is the radiant expression of discriminating awareness—
One’s mind as the red syllable hrīḥ .
From it, light radiates, in offering to the victors and their heirs,
Purifying the obscurations of beings. The world and all beings
Are the unexcelled pure realm, Lotus-Arrayed,
Complete as the inexhaustible wheel of ornaments.
The light is reabsorbed, becoming a five-pronged vajra,
Marked at its hub with hrīḥ .
Transforming instantly, perfected at once,
I become the Deathless Lake-Born Vajra,
Embodiment of all vidyādhara gurus,
With one face, two arms, and a white-red complexion,
Youthful with a smile of ease, and marked with the excellent signs.
With my right hand poised in the threatening mudrā,
I hold a golden vajra in front of my chest.
With my left hand in equipoise, I hold a kapāla
Filled with the amṛta of immortality.
The secret consort, my natural bliss-bestowing light,
Embraces me whilst holding a curved knife and skullcup.
I am adorned with silks, jewels, and utpala flowers,
My two legs arranged in the vajra posture.
In my heart center, upon a lotus and moon,
Is the wisdom being, Avalokiteśvara.
He is the color of magnetizing, 1 with one face and four arms,
Two joined at the palms, two holding a mālā and a lotus.
Above his head, upon lotus, sun, and corpse seat,
Is glorious Hayagrīva, in whom all deities converge,
Dark red in color, displaying the ninefold dance,
Resplendent with the glorious and charnel-ground attires.
He revels in union with his consort, dark blue Vārāhī,
The leader of a hundred thousand sky-dancers.
Their crowns are marked respectively with a neighing horse head and a squealing sow.
His two hands hold a curved knife and skullcup filled with blood,
He stands with his two legs in the champion stance,
Poised amid a blaze of wisdom fire.
Above his head, upon a seat of lotus and moon,
Is Boundless Light, 2 the family lord.
Radiant red in color, he holds an alms bowl in equipoise,
Wearing nirmāṇakāya attire, resplendent with the excellent signs.
Filling the space above, amid rainbows, light rays, and bindus,
Are the root and lineage vidyādhara gurus,
The infinite ranks of peaceful and wrathful yidams,
And the buddhas and bodhisattvas of all ten directions.
With wisdom-amṛta, they bestow empowerment.
They rain down flowers, and sound forth music,
Reciting prayers for auspiciousness, and singing vajra songs.
Throughout the space between are vīras and yoginīs,
Presenting outer and inner offerings, vast as cloudbanks, filling the sky.
They are surrounded, at the edge, by the three classes of arrogant spirits
In the form of faithful attendants, aides, and servants.
All express the unity of appearance and emptiness.
In their three places, the three main figures
Are marked by the three vajra-syllables,
From which light rays stream out,
Inviting the wisdom beings to come.
Hūṃ. In the earliest aeon, in times gone by,
In Uḍḍiyāna’s bright northwest,
On the heart of a lotus flower
You came, renowned as Lotus Born,
Your supreme siddhi wondrous,
With your retinue of ḍākinīs.
Following in your footsteps, we pray:
Come forth and bestow your blessings!
Bestow resplendence upon this supreme place!
Bestow the four empowerments upon us, supreme yogis!
Remove all obstructers, false guides, and hindrances,
And bestow the supreme and common siddhis!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru deva ḍākinī saparivāra vajra samaya jaḥ siddhi phala hūṃ āḥ
From the three places of the wisdom beings
Gathered in the sky before me,
All the blessings of their three secrets
Stream out in the form of deities, mantras, implements,
And light rays, all dissolving into me.
Thus, my four obscurations are purified, I am ripened by the four empowerments,
The seeds of the four kāyas are sown within me,
And the supreme and common siddhis are attained.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru padma siddhi hūṃ
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru deva ḍākinī saparivāra vajra samaya jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ kāya vāka citta tiṣṭha jñāna vajra svabhāva ātmako ‘haṃ
Indivisibility of samaya and wisdom
Is deity phenomena, vivid and stable.
With self-emanated goddesses,
I bow and present offerings and praise.
Hoḥ. The three-roots deities of natural awareness
Are forever of one taste, beyond meeting and parting.
Yet, to purify the delusion of dualistic fixation,
I pay homage with this gesture of respect.
atipūhoḥ pratīccha hoḥ
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ. This boundless ocean of offering substances,
Material and imagined, in infinite variety,
I multiply into vast Ever-Excellent 4 offering clouds
And present to the deathless deities of the three roots.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru deva ḍākinī saparivāra arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe aloke gandhe naivedye śabda pratīccha svāhā
With the sublime samaya of unchanging great bliss
Of the equal union of object and faculty,
With every possible form of sense delights,
Host of maṇḍala deities, may you be pleased!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru deva ḍākinī saparivāra rūpa śabda gandhe rāsa sparśe pratīccha svāhā
Oṃ. Amṛta of the eight root and thousand ingredients,
Rakta of the liberated three realms,
And bali replete with the five sensory delights
I present to you, deathless deities of the Three Roots.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru deva ḍākinī saparivāra sarva pañca amṛta rakta balingta pūja hoḥ
Āḥ. By rousing the four joys in the central channel,
Dualistic thought is liberated into basic space.
This sublime offering of the three spheres transcended,
This supreme gift, partake of it, please!
tana gaṇa jñāna pūja hoḥ
Hrīḥ. The essence is dharmakāya Boundless Light;
The nature is sambhogakāya Avalokiteśvara;
The compassionate capacity is nirmāṇakāya Pemajungné—
To you, the three kāyas indivisible, I offer praise!
Embodiment of all vidyādhara gurus;
Universal monarch of peaceful and wrathful yidams;
Lord of all vīras and ḍākinīs—
To you, in whom the three roots converge, I offer praise!
Lake-Born Vajra, you are the essence of the Three Jewels.
You are a tathāgata embodying the primordial wisdom
Of all the buddhas and their heirs of all ten directions.
To you, your retinue, and your emanations, I offer praise!
Through the power of this offering and praise,
In the short term, may I accomplish the four activities,
And may I attain the ultimate state
Of the deathless three kāyas within this very life!
In the heart centre of the wisdom being,
Within an orb of sun and moon, means and insight,
Is the samadhi being, a red syllable hrīḥ .
It is surrounded by the mantra garland, spinning clockwise.
Light streams out and makes offerings to the Three Roots.
Their blessings and siddhis return and dissolve into me.
Light streams forth again, all reification is purified,
And the world and beings are the wheel of deity, mantra, and wisdom.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru padma deva ḍākinī sarva siddhi phala hūṃ āḥ
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ. From the palace of ever-pure basic space,
Essence-dharmakāya of unchanging light,
Lake-Born Vajra, I invoke your sacred bonds;
Fulfill the activity of pacifying duality!
From the palace of spontaneously-present awareness,
Nature-sambhogakāya, treasure of compassion,
Five families of Skull Garland Ones, I invoke your sacred bonds;
Fulfill the activity of increasing wisdom!
From the palace of unity that liberates beings,
You emanate a dance of all-pervasive capacity.
Eight Supreme Manifestations, I invoke your sacred bonds;
Fulfill the activity of magnetizing subtle wind-mind!
From the palace of the inseparable four kāyas,
Heruka embodiment of all three roots,
Fierce Lotus, I invoke your sacred bonds;
Fulfill the activity of vanquishing duality!
Return all perceived forms into vajra form,
Dissolve the life-force wind into the avadhūti-mudrā,
And, with all thoughts naturally liberated from the beginning,
Fulfill the activity of transcending birth and death!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru deva ḍākinī sarva karma siddhi phala hūṃ āḥ
From the heart-centers of all the deities,
Light rays of compassion radiate in all directions,
Accomplishing the common and supreme siddhis
And carrying out the four types of activity.
oṃ śāntim kuru svāhā
bhruṃ puśtim kuru oṃ
hrīḥ vāśam kuru hoḥ
hūṃ māraya phaṭ
Hrīḥ. From my heart-center, light radiates forth,
Incinerating, scattering, and purifying all fixation on all that is gathered.
The outer world is a kapāla of great bliss,
The inner contents are amṛta-sensory delights.
raṃ yaṃ khaṃ
oṃ āḥ hūṃ hrīḥ
Hrīḥ. Come, from the unexcelled pure realm of great bliss!
Come, dharmakāya of unchanging light,
Surrounded by your vast retinue of sugatas!
I invite you to this gathering; please come!
Come, from Mount Potala in the south!
Come, Great Compassionate sambhogakāya,
Surrounded by your vast retinue of buddhas and heirs!
I invite you to this gathering; please come!
Come, from the Glorious Mountain of Cāmara in the northwest!
Come, Lotus Skull-Garland nirmāṇakāya,
Surrounded by your vast retinue of the three roots!
I invite you to this gathering; please come!
From the sacred places, lands, and the eight charnel grounds,
Come, Black Maning wisdom protector,
Surrounded by your vast retinue of Dharma guardians!
I invite you to this gathering; please come!
The gathering hall is a natural nirmāṇakāya realm.
The gathering substances are potent, undefiled amṛta.
Bestow your blessed resplendence so that all appearances,
Sounds, and thoughts manifest as deity, mantra, and wisdom!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru deva ḍākinī dharmapāla saparivāra vajra samaya jaḥ jaḥ
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ. In the kapāla vessel of appearance
Is arranged the gathering torma of existence.
With these oceanic offering-clouds of sensory delights,
Great host of Three-Root deities, may you be pleased!
In the kapāla of self-perfected aggregates
Is arranged the gathering torma of channels, winds, and drops.
With these offering-clouds of appearance-emptiness unity,
Great host of Three-Root deities, may you be pleased!
In the kapāla of the central channel’s luminosity
Is arranged the gathering torma of the harnessed life-force wind.
With these offering-clouds of self-liberated audible emptiness,
Great host of Three-Root deities, may you be pleased!
In the kapāla of reversed essence drops
Is arranged the gathering torma of four-joys wisdom.
With these offering-clouds of bliss and emptiness indivisible,
Great host of Three-Root deities, may you be pleased!
In the primordial kapāla of ground-space
Is arranged the gathering torma of ground-appearance wisdoms.
With these offering-clouds of the unsurpassable and supreme,
Great host of Three-Root deities, may you be pleased!
In the kapāla of the wish-fulfilling jewel
Is arranged the gathering torma of food and drink.
With this endless array of enjoyments,
Great host of Three-Root deities, may you be pleased!
Deathless mandala deities of the three roots,
Please, accept these gathering offerings—
Outer, inner, secret, and suchness—
And bestow, I beseech you, the supreme and common siddhis!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru deva ḍākinī dharmapāla saparivāra gaṇacakra pūja hoḥ
Hoḥ. From time without beginning until now,
In the grip and control of karma and afflictions,
I have collected misdeeds, obscurations, and downfalls.
All of these I amend and confess with this gathering offering!
Hūṃ. The foes and obstructers of perceiving an ego
Are liberated with the vajra weapon of egolessness.
The aggregates and elements—samaya substances of the five families—
I offer up to this gathering of Three-Root deities.
sarva śātrūn bighnān māraya mahā pañca amṛta pūja hoḥ
Phem phem. Hordes of mighty gods, skeleton-aides, and rākṣasas,
You who guard the maṇḍala from the fringe,
Accept this legacy-offering of the Glorious One,
And fulfill the activities entrusted to you!
oṃ ucchiṣṭa balingta bhuñja hoḥ
Hūṃ bhyoḥ. Ekajāṭi, bindu of basic space;
Rāhula, naturally arising awareness;
Black Maning, wisdom beyond duality;
And great host of arrogant spirits of the three classes—
In bygone times, you made pledges and promises
Before the ever-excellent and supreme
Lotus Skull Garland, Pema Tötreng himself. Just as you vowed,
Come here and accept this torma of samaya substances!
Free us vidyādharas and all our retinues
From untimely death and obstacles!
Increase our lifespan, merit, prosperity, and following!
Carry out the four types of activity!
śrī vajra dharmapāla saparivāra idam balingta bhuñja hoḥ
Hūṃ. Within the expanse of the twelve links in their true mode,
The movement of the zodiacs transmuted to their pure state,
You are wisdom beings, yet you manifest as karmic beings,
As the host of Tenmas watching over Tibet and Kham.
At Asura cave, you were commanded
By the deathless Lotus Born.
Just as you were instructed, and just as you pledged,
Come here! Come here to this maṇḍala of the Three Roots!
To this gathering of herukas, come!
Partake of this rinsing-water amrita,
And perform the activities, that all beings in the Snowy Land may be well
And that the doctrine may flourish and spread!
mama hrīng hrīng amṛta pūja hoḥ
Hūṃ. The horde of samaya corrupters—dualistic delusion—
Are suppressed in the basic space of liberation’s three gates,
And are sealed there by this vajra dance,
Never to reappear until awakening!
sarva śātrūn bighnān stvambhaya nan
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ. Supreme deities, in whom all Three Roots converge,
You are a wealth of blessings, a treasury of siddhis,
A cascade of activities. All you deities gathered here,
Bestow upon us practitioners, right here and now,
The siddhis of immortality, unending wealth,
Ability, mantric power, access to the samādhis,
The four activities, the eight common siddhis,
The four vidyādhara states, the splendor of the ten powers,
The common and supreme siddhis of kāyas and wisdoms indivisible—
All of these accomplishments, I beseech you,
Bestow them upon us this very moment,
So that the two goals may be fulfilled!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ hrīḥ vajra guru padma deva ḍākinī kāya vāka citta sarva siddhi phala hūṃ āḥ
Hoḥ. Since ultimate reality is originally concept-free,
Beyond dualistic fixation and all of its marks,
The entire mass of relative, adventitious delusion
I confess within basic space, where the three spheres are not seen.
A. From the unborn nature of mind,
The magical display of the maṇḍala deities is born.
Like a rainbow disappearing in the sky,
The maṇḍala dissolves into innate luminosity.
a a aḥ
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ. Once more, all that appears is the deity’s wisdom form,
All sounds that ring out are indestructible vajra sound,
And all thoughts are awareness-space naturally liberated.
Conduct yourself within the illusory union state.
Hoḥ. The virtue—both merit and wisdom—
Gathered by myself and all infinite beings
Throughout past, present, and future too,
I dedicate to the heart of awakening.
Henceforth, throughout all my lives,
May I never part from the supreme guru, and,
Through the practice of the profound two stages,
May I swiftly fulfill my own and all others’ goals.
Hoḥ. May there be the auspiciousness of the root and lineage vidyādhara gurus,
Complete embodiments of the primordial wisdom
Of the buddhas and bodhisattvas of all directions and times,
Showering down their blessings like rain!
From the dharmakāya state, the sambhogakāya comes forth,
And nirmāṇakāya emanations in all manner of guises.
May there be the auspiciousness of the peaceful and wrathful yidams
Bestowing the siddhis, the accomplishments, upon us!
Abiding in the sacred places, lands, and charnel grounds,
Are the vīras, ḍākinīs, and dharmapālas—
The annihilators, the overseers, the guardians of the doctrine.
May there be the auspiciousness of them fulfilling the commands!
May Buddha’s teaching, the wellspring of benefit and bliss
In both existence and peace, spread in all ten directions;
May the lotus feet of the teaching holders remain firm;
And may the world be filled with virtuous auspiciousness!
May the enjoined common activities—pacifying, increasing,
Magnetizing, and subjugating—all be swiftly accomplished,
And ultimately, within unchanging basic space,
May we attain true awakening! May such auspiciousness abound!