Illuminating the Path to Liberation A Preliminary Practice (Ngöndro) Common Preliminaries Freedoms and Advantages Impermanence and Death Actions and Their Effects Trials of Saṃsāra Uncommon Preliminaries Taking Refuge Generating Bodhicitta Maṇḍala Offering Vajrasattva Visualization and Mantra Recitation Guru Yoga Seven-Line Prayer Seven-Branch Practice Receiving Empowerment
O guru, care for me!
The freedoms and advantages are difficult to find, like the uḍumbara flower,
And, when secured, are of immense significance — greater even than a wish-granting jewel.
Yet now that we have this unique opportunity,
We fail to accomplish what is of long-term value
And instead waste our time in frivolous pursuits—
O guru, embodiment of the Three Jewels, look upon us with compassion!
Grant your blessings and inspire us to make the most of the freedoms and advantages!
All conditioned things are as transient as lightning in the sky.
Consider the environment or its inhabitants: everything perishes in the end.
Death is inevitable, yet the time of death is uncertain.
We thus deceive ourselves in the belief that things endure
And spend our time without due care and attention—
O guru, embodiment of the Three Jewels, look upon us with compassion!
Grant your blessings and inspire us to be mindful of impermanence and death!
The results of positive and negative deeds do not go to waste.
It is through the infallible operation of cause and effect
That all the phenomena of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa come about.
Although we are sure to experience the effects of our own actions,
Still we are incapable of acting and refraining from actions accordingly.
O guru, embodiment of the Three Jewels, look upon us with compassion!
Grant your blessings and inspire us to adopt virtuous action and abandon harmful deeds!
We face so many sufferings that are difficult to endure,
And apparent pleasures deceive us with their transience.
All defiled aggregates are but the cause of suffering.
Saṃāra's three realms are just like a pit of flames,
Yet in our failure to understand this, we remain attached.
O guru, embodiment of the Three Jewels, look upon us with compassion!
Grant your blessings and inspire us to develop an attitude of renunciation!
In the space before me is a great wish-fulfilling tree with five main branches;
In its centre is the guru Vajradhara of Oḍḍiyāna,
Surrounded by the lineage gurus, yidam deities and ḍākinīs.
In front of him is the supreme teacher together with the buddhas of the three times.
To his right are the eight close sons and the noble assembly of the Mahāyāna.
Behind is the word of the Buddha in the form of scriptures.
To his left are the eight supreme disciples and saṅgha of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas.
Surrounding them all are the wisdom dharma-protectors,
And all the sources of refuge of the ten directions and three times
In their entirety with none missing, like a mass of sesame seeds.
Before them all, I, my mother and other close relations,
And all beings who pervade the whole of space bow down together in devotion
And consider that from now until we attain the essence of awakening,
We take refuge with the utmost confidence and trust:
I and all beings of the six classes respectfully take refuge
In the gurus, yidam deities and hosts of ḍākinīs,
And the Buddha, Dharma and noble Saṅgha,
Who fill the expanse of space at the level of the sky.
Ho. Just as the victorious buddhas and their heirs throughout past, present and future
Generate the intention to attain supreme awakening,
Now I too set my mind upon supreme and unsurpassed enlightenment,
So that I may liberate all beings who extend throughout the whole of space.
I and other sentient beings, infinite in number,
Have always been buddhas from the very beginning.
In acknowledgement that this is how things are,
We generate the mind of supreme awakening!
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Within the dharmakāya pure realm, the dharmadhātu expanse of equality,
Are the self-appearing, unending sambhogakāya realms of the five families,
And an array of nirmāṇakāya realms pervading the whole of space—
All this I offer as the delightful offering clouds of Samantabhadra!
oṃ ratna maṇḍala pūja megha samudra spharana samaye āḥ hūṃ
Ā. Above the crown of my head, upon a lotus and moon-disc seat,
Is glorious Vajrasattva, the colour of the moon.
He holds a vajra and bell and embraces the consort, Vajragarvā. 1
In full saṃbhogakāya attire, he is seated in vajra posture.
On a moon-disc at his heart is Hūṃ, encircled by the hundred syllables.
Amṛta nectar flows down to purify misdeeds and obscurations.
oṃ vajrasattva samayam anupālaya vajrasattva-tvenopa-tiṣṭha dṛḍho me bhava sutoṣyo me bhava supoṣyo me bhava anurakto me bhava sarva-siddhiṃ me prayaccha sarva-karma śuca me cittaṃ śreyaṅ-kuru hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ bhagavān sarva-tathāgata-vajra mā me muñca vajrī-bhava mahā-samaya-sattva āḥ
O protector! In my ignorance and delusion
I have gone against and corrupted my samaya.
Guru protector, be my refuge!
Chief of all the maṇḍalas, vajra holder,
Embodiment of great compassion:
Foremost of all living beings, in you I take refuge! 2
I and all sentient beings openly acknowledge and confess all impairments of the root and branch samayas related to body, speech and mind.
We implore you: let our misdeeds, obscurations and faults of transgression—all our flaws—be completely cleansed and purified!
oṃ vajrasatva hūṃ
Through the positivity and merit of this, may I swiftly
Attain the realization of Vajrasattva, and thereby
Every single sentient being
Reach his state of perfection too.
For me and all sentient beings,
May all impairments and breakages of samaya be purified!
From now until we attain the essence of awakening,
May our samaya commitments remain entirely pure!
Emaho!
In the naturally appearing realm of infinite purity,
My own body appears clearly as Vajrayoginī.
At my crown, on a thousand-petalled lotus, sun and moon,
Is the embodiment of all sources of refuge, the Vajradhara of Oḍḍiyāna,
White with a tinge of red, smiling peacefully, and holding vajra and skullcup containing a vase of immortality.
In full saṃbhogakāya attire, he embraces the consort Yeshe Tsogyal.
Complete within his body are all the self-arisen tantric maṇḍalas.
All the root and lineage gurus, ḍākinīs and oath-bound ones
Amass like a vast outpouring of sesame seeds.
The wisdom counterparts arrive from Cāmara (Ngayab Ling),
Showering down like rain and dissolving into the visualized forms.
Hūṃ! In the north-west of the land of Uḍḍiyāna,
In the heart of a lotus flower,
Endowed with the most marvellous attainments,
You are renowned as the ‘Lotus Born’,
Surrounded by many hosts of ḍākinīs.
Following in your footsteps,
I pray to you: Come, inspire me with your blessing!
guru padma siddhi hūṃ
Ho. With bodies as numerous as atoms, I bow down and prostrate in devotion.
The whole of appearance and existence arisen as the ground, I present as Samantabhadra's offering.
All the misdeeds and downfalls I have committed throughout my lives, I confess.
In all virtuous deeds throughout saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, I rejoice.
I implore you: remain in the vajra-kāya for as long as beings and realms remain,
And turn the wheel of the Dharma that is profound and vast.
All virtues without exception I dedicate towards the attainment of awakening.
To the west, in Oḍḍiyāna's palace of power,
You appeared as an emanation of the sugatas' body, speech and mind,
And came to this world of Jambudvīpa for ordinary beings' sake,
Surrounded by a retinue of many vidyādharas and ḍākinīs—
Assembled deities of Padmasambhava, to you I pray!
Padmasambhava of Oḍḍiyāna, to you I pray!
Grant me empowerment and inspire me with your blessings, I pray!
In the dark red triangular mansion of power,
Treading on the dark māra demons, male and female,
Arises Padma Heruka, king of power,
Surrounded by the wrathful deities of the Padma family
To you, mighty Hayagrīva and all your deities, we pray!
To the Lotus-born Guru of Orgyen, we pray! 3
Grant me empowerment and inspire me with your blessings, I pray!
In the wrathful mansion that arises from the dark blue syllable é,
Trampling on Yama, the water buffalo,
Is Mañjuśrī in the form of Yamāntaka, slayer of the Lord of Death,
Surrounded by his horde of wild and wrathful slaughterers:
To you, Yamāntaka and all your deities, we pray!
To the Lotus-born Guru of Orgyen, we pray! 4
Grant me empowerment and inspire me with your blessings, I pray!
From the three syllables at the guru's three centres
Stream out rays of white, red and blue light,
Which dissolve into my own three centres, infusing me with blessings.
Then the guru and retinue melt into light,
And, having entered the brahma-path, dissolve into the core of my heart.
Then, with my own mind inseparable from the guru's wisdom,
I rest in an experience of mind's genuine nature, dharmakāya.
This purifies the four obscurations, and I obtain the wisdom of the four empowerments.
With mastery of the four paths and realization of the four kāyas,
I receive each and every form of blessing and empowerment.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru padma siddhi hūṃ
In all my lives, may I never be separated from the perfect guru,
And having benefited fully from the splendour of the Dharma,
May I perfect the qualities of the five paths and ten bhūmis,
And swiftly attain the sublime level of Vajradhara!