Damchen Chitor: A Brief Practice of Torma Offering to the Oath-Bound Guardians 1 Then for the invitation of the guests Invocation Request to be Seated Binding under Oath Offerings Torma Offering Entrusting Activity Praise General Torma Offering to the Treasure Keepers Invocation Offering Entrusting with Activities Praise General Torma Offering to the Local Deities Invocation Offering Outer and Inner Offering Entrusting with Activities Gukpa—summoning of negative forces Blessing Offering Torma Concluding Prayer for the Fulfilment of Aspirations Offering and Praise Confession of Mistakes Consecration Dedication of Merit Prayer of Auspiciousness
Om siddhirastu!
Raṃ yaṃ khaṃ! From the state of emptiness, out of yaṃ there arises wind, out of raṃ there arises fire, and out of khaṃ there appears a tripod of three human skulls.
Upon this tripod, out of a syllable A, there are appears a skull, its contents transformed through hūṃ oṃ swa ang hah and mum lam mam pam tam into the five nectars and five lamps, each marked with their own seed syllable.
As the wind stirs beneath them, fire blazes up, melting and mixing all the substances. In the sky above are the three syllables oṃ āḥ hūṃ, emanating rays of light to invoke wisdom nectar from the hearts of all the buddhas.
The wisdom nectar is absorbed into the three syllables, and they gradually melt, mixing inseparably with the samaya substances.
From the syllable hūṃ at my heart appear hook-shaped rays of light, streaking out like lightning, to invoke the glorious wisdom protectors and oath-bound guardians, together with their consorts, retinues and attendants.
They arise out of the dharmadhātu, and appear in a display of magical forms, some peaceful, some wrathful. They all gather in the sky before me, in a vast array that defies the imagination. Vajra samāja.
Hūṃ! From the dharmadhātu, space-like realm of purity,
Immutable Akaniṣṭha, the realm of joy,
The Vajra Seat (Bodhgaya) and Nālandā,
The eight charnel grounds and twenty-four sacred places,
And all the infinite pure realms throughout the ten directions,
Glorious protectors, together with your consorts, retinues,
Attendants and all you oath-bound guardians in this ocean-like gathering,
When I invite you here, through the force of my faith,
As in the solemn oaths you took in the past,
Come now, to protect the teachings, I pray!
Hūṃ! Great samaya-bound protectors of the teachings
Of all the buddhas of the past, present and future.
Together with your consorts, retinue, and attendants,
Come here, I pray, and gladly take your places.
Hūṃ, I emanate both ordinary and unsurpassable gifts,
Clouds of outer, inner and secret offerings,
Actually arranged and those created by the mind,
Filling the whole of space—all this I offer.
The deities send out rays of light from the hollow vajra tubes arising from hūṃ in their tongues of the deities, collect the essence of the tormas and consume them.
Glorious Mahākāla, king of the wrathful,
Guardian of temples and maṇḍalas,
Healer of the sickness of the three poisons,
Warrior-spirit (drala) of all practitioners,
Hero who liberates the hordes of demons,
Great guardian of the teachings.
Gönpo Lekden, vajra rākṣasa and master of the feast,
Four-armed Mahākāla,
Swift in action, six-armed wisdom protector,
Glorious protector Maning Nakpo,
Mighty wrathful one, Four-faced Mahākāla,
Great Śvanamukha who is the vajra tramen, 4
Mamo, protectress of the mantra teachings,
Mahādeva, Maheshvara,
Viṣṇu, 'poisonous razor',
The great king, Vaiśravaṇa,
Local protectors, mamos of the charnel ground,
Yama of activity, Black Lord of Death,
Damchen Dorjé Lekpa,
Five sisters of auspiciousness and longevity,
The seven wild tsen brothers and the rest—all you guardians who protect the sacred Dharma, attendants, armies of messengers, together with your retinues, accept this vast torma offering and protect the teachings of Buddha.
Elevate the status of the Three Jewels,
Protect the reign of the saṅgha and the Dharma,
Eliminate degeneration from the world,
Increase the benefit and happiness of beings,
Be a support to practitioners,
Accomplish the activity of the mantra holders,
Subdue the hostile,
Destroy harmful obstacle-makers,
In particular, pacify outer, inner and secret adversity for all of us gathered here through our samaya,
Expand and increase all positivity and fortunate circumstances,
And carry out your enlightened activity of swiftly bringing about all the supreme and ordinary accomplishments.
Hūṃ! Glorious Mahākāla, terrifying and wrathful,
Annihilator of demonic hordes, liberating Ging of the charnel ground,
Fulfiller of practitioner's wishes, Lekden, master of the feast,
Mighty attendant of the buddhas, to you I offer praise!
From the unchanging state of dharmadhātu, utterly pure,
You emanate in compassionate forms, through your great wisdom,
Tamers of unruly hordes, foremost among Mahākālas,
Wrathful ones of power, to you I offer homage and praise!
Great Fierce One, blazing and intensely wrathful heruka,
Tamer of the malevolent, in your form of great compassion,
Utterly destroying all mistaken views, with the sound of hūṃ and phaṭ,
To you, possessor of the mind of wisdom, together with your retinue, I offer praise!
Appearing in the past in a world gone by,
Glorious Chemchok Heruka, in whom the three kāyas are complete,
Subduer of the three classes of rudra—the ego-clinging at the root of existence,
Mighty in Action, to you I offer homage and praise!
Utterly terrifying, in a charnel ground, an expanse of blazing apocalyptic fire,
Life pillar for vajradhāras, warrior spirit of practitioners,
Powerful and miraculous guardian of the teachings,
Subduer of all the arrogant ones, to you I offer homage and praise!
From the sky-like expanse of Vajrakumāra and consort,
The magical display of wrathful compassion,
Ferocious Mahākāla, great Śvanamukha,
Together with your retinue of tramen, to you I offer homage and praise!
Emanation of Samantabhadra's wisdom mind, wrathful mother,
Ekajaṭī, wisdom mamo with a single tuft of hair,
Mighty guardian of the secret mantra teachings,
Together with your five classes of attendants and messengers, to you I offer praise!
Great Īśvara, emanation of Avalokiteśvara,
Forefather of the world, master of all three realms,
Granter of supreme siddhi, deity of perfect qualities,
Mighty attendant of the buddhas, to you I offer praise!
Son who emanated from the heruka's glorious mind,
Foremost of the haughty among the eight classes,
Accomplisher of all ferocious activity, Rāhula,
Together with your retinue of the four sisters and eight classes, I offer praise!
Master of the eighth bhūmi, bodhisattva of many riches,
Eliminating poverty through offering the treasury of space,
Wish-fulfilling tree, bringing down a rain of all that is desired,
Vaiśravaṇa, to you I offer praise!
From the dharmadhātu realm of unchanging great bliss,
Appearing in the form of a wrathful goddess to subjugate the unruly,
Vajra dance of magical manifestation, foremost of the mamos,
To you, the principal guardian of the Buddha's teachings, I offer homage and praise!
Through your unhindered activity, swift and powerful,
You defeat malevolent enemies, demons and obstructing forces,
Yamāntaka, together with your oath-bound attendants,
The retinue of baibhasata, to you I offer praise!
In the past, in the presence of Śākyamuni Buddha,
You vowed to guard the teachings and determine good and evil,
Great upāsaka Dorjé Lekpa,
Guardian of the world, to you I offer praise!
Generator of wisdom, great dharmakāya mother,
Vajra queen to all the buddhas, yoginī,
Lady of the maṇḍalas of guardians of buddha's teachings in the Land of Snows,
Auspicious Lady of Longevity, to you I offer praise!
Obedient attendants of Padmasambhava, master of the maṇḍala,
Always remembering their samaya commitment, terma guardians
Your four kinds of activity, powerful and unobstructed,
Fulfilling the wishes of those who keep the samaya, wild Tsen, to you I offer praise!
From the seed syllable at my heart, rays of light stream out to invoke all the treasure keepers together with their retinues.
Hūṃ! In the past, in the presence of Padmasambhava,
You took on the commitment to guard the profound termas,
Great and mighty keepers of treasures,
Together with your own retinues of servants, come now to this place!
Lords among the guardians of the profound termas, together with your retinues, please accept these sacred offerings, and guard the teachings of Buddha.
Elevate the status of the Three Jewels,
Protect the reign of the saṅgha and the Dharma,
Eliminate any degeneration from the world,
Increase the benefit and happiness of beings,
Be a support to practitioners,
Accomplish the activity of the mantra holders,
Subdue the hostile,
Destroy harmful obstacle-makers,
In particular, pacify outer, inner and secret adversity for all of us gathered here through our samaya,
Expand and increase all positivity and fortunate circumstances,
Carry out the enlightened activity of swiftly bringing about all the supreme and ordinary accomplishments.
Hūṃ! Attendants of the buddhas of past, present and future, great warriors,
Who hold a commitment to do the bidding of all vidyādharas,
You who have sworn an oath to guard the profound terma teachings,
Treasure keepers, together with your retinues, to you I offer praise!
From the state of emptiness appears the syllable bhrūṃ, which transforms into a precious vessel, deep and vast, which contains a torma with perfect colour, smell, taste and power.
Local deities, who remain in this place, together with your retinues, accept these sacred offerings.
Elevate the status of the Three Jewels,
Protect the reign of the saṅgha and the Dharma,
Eliminate any degeneration from the world,
Increase the benefit and happiness of beings,
Be a support to practitioners,
Accomplish the activity of the mantra holders,
Subdue the hostile,
Destroy harmful obstacle-makers,
In particular, pacify outer, inner and secret adversity for all of us gathered here through our samaya,
Expand and increase all positivity and fortunate circumstances,
Carry out the enlightened activity of swiftly bringing about all the supreme and ordinary accomplishments.
All you great local deities,
Accept this offering torma,
And carry out your activities, so we, the practitioners and those around
May enjoy good health, long life, power,
Glory, renown, good fortune,
Wealth and abundant possessions.
Grant us the siddhi of performing
The activities of pacifying, enriching and the rest,
Samaya-bound ones, guard me,
Be a support for all the accomplishments,
Eliminate untimely death and disease,
Obstructing forces and obstacle-makers,
Eliminate bad dreams and evil omens,
And all forms of negative action.
Bring peace to the world and bountiful harvests,
May grains and livestock be ever more plentiful,
A source of every happiness and good,
May all that we wish for be accomplished.
Namo! Through the power of the truth of the vidyādharas, the glorious and sacred root and lineage masters,
And the truth of the buddhas,
And the truth of the Dharma,
And the truth of the saṅgha,
And the truth of the secret mantras and vidyā mantras and dhāraṇī mantras and essence mantras and mudrās and states of samādhi,
And the truth of the infallibility of the cause and effect of phenomenal reality, though the reality of dharmatā has been empty throughout beginningless time,
And especially through the power of the truth of the protectors who guard the vajrayāna teachings, along with the armies of messengers and attendants who carry out commands, and all their retinues:
By the power of the great truths of all of these, may the general obstructions to the teachings and to beings,
And especially the forces that obstruct us, the vidyādharas, together with our patrons and retinues—those who have risen up against us in the past,
Those who plot future harm
And those who are now in our path, those with form and those who have no form but bring harm—may all of these, wherever they may be in the three states of conditioned existence, wherever they have fled, instantly, in a single moment, may they be summoned into this focal point for visualization!
Hūṃ! Arising in blazing wrathful form out of the dharmadhātu,
Powerful and mighty lord, Vajra Mahākāla,
Together with your consort and retinue, attendants, and an ocean-like gathering of oath-bound guardians,
Through the force of your commitments, come now to this place!
Outer, inner and secret offerings, amṛta, torma and rakta,
The flesh and blood of enemies and obstacle-makers, and all that is appropriate,
Whatever each one desires showers down
This great and wondrous cloud of offerings to delight you,
We offer in gratitude for all your excellent actions of the past,
And for granting us in future the siddhi of carrying out
The four kinds of activity, without ever wavering,
Accept these offerings with great delight, and having enjoyed them,
Cause benefit and happiness to increase among the teachings and beings.
In particular, for us, teachers and disciples,
May we enjoy good health, long-life and glory that is unchanging,
Fame, and infinite prosperity.
May all trouble caused by unruly demonic influence and enemies be pacified,
May we accomplish all manner of enlightened activity, on a scale as vast as the ocean,
Hold aloft the banner of victory over all opponents,
And may you guard and protect us until we reach enlightenment.
Ocean of samaya bound protectors,
Accept this offering torma,
And carry out your activities, so we, the practitioners and those around
May enjoy good health, long life, power,
Glory, renown, good fortune,
Wealth and abundant possessions.
Grant us the siddhi of performing
The activities of pacifying, enriching and the rest,
Samaya-bound ones, guard me,
Be a support for all the accomplishments,
Eliminate untimely death and disease,
Obstructing forces and obstacle-makers,
Eliminate bad dreams and evil omens,
And all forms of negative action.
Bring peace to the world and bountiful harvests,
May grains and livestock be ever more plentiful,
A source of every happiness and good,
May all that we wish for be accomplished.
I offer praise to all you oath-bound guardians,
Who guard and protect the teachings
Now just as you swore an oath to in the past
In the presence of the glorious Heruka.
Anything I did not accomplish or complete,
And anything I was unable to do,
Whatever mistakes I have made,
Please forgive them all!
Remain here, one with these images and objects,
Until saṃsāra comes to an end;
Grant us freedom from illness, long life, power and prosperity, and
Make everything supremely auspicious—we pray!
oṃ supratiṣṭha-vajraye svāhā
Oṃ , You who work for the benefit of beings
And accordingly grant each their accomplishment,
Even though you now return to your buddha realm,
In the future, please come again!
vajra mu
Through the positivity and merit of this, may I swiftly
Attain the realization of the glorious Heruka, and thereby
Every single sentient being
Reach his state of perfection too.
Lords of infinite, ocean-like maṇḍalas,
Vajra beings, your secret body, speech and mind in unchanging great bliss,
Wish-fulfilling trees bestowing the supreme benefit and happiness on beings,
Root and lineage masters, make everything auspicious!
Out of the space of the dharmakāya, appear countless clouds of form bodies
In peaceful and wrathful forms,
Bringing a rain of all the accomplishments we desire,
Hosts of yidam deities, make everything auspicious!
Glorious heruka, dance of compassion,
Great ferocious one, with your unbearable splendour,
You annihilate those who do evil, together with all their supporters,
Glorious Mahākāla, blazing in wrath, make everything auspicious!
Unbearably wrathful attendants of the Buddha,
Annihilating demonic hordes, and caring for practitioners like your only child,
With the four activities, you protect the teachings-
Ocean of oath-bound guardians, make everything auspicious!