Advice for Zhichen Gyalsé Kunnyi
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
I pay homage at the feet of the guru. 
Now you have this excellent support, the freedoms and advantages,
But it will be difficult to find such an opportunity again.
Do not squander your human life in indolence
And end up with nothing to show for it,
But exert yourself, I beg you, in practising sacred Dharma. 
Life is impermanent and recedes with each passing moment.
Since the virtuous and harmful actions you accumulate
Will accompany you, avoid and adopt causes and effects.
And bring to mind the sufferings of saṃsāra. 
Generate bodhicitta as a preliminary to all Dharma.
For the main part, whenever accumulating virtue,
Settle in a state beyond reference, without grasping.
Seal with dedication free from three conceptual spheres,
And recite prayers of utterly pure aspiration. 
Guard this mind of yours at all times
With mindfulness and vigilance.
Bodhicitta is the root of Dharma.
Abandon all the ties of selfishness
And apply yourself to benefitting others—this is crucial. 
Since the great spectre of self-clinging,
Source of all defects, will bring ruin,
Strive to target all Dharma towards it
And thoroughly eradicate the demon. 
The source of all blessings and attainments
Is to rely upon the guru, glorious protector,
So, having created a basis of faith and samaya,
Generate devotion and receive the blessings.
Or else attainments will be extremely meagre.
Strive, therefore, in practice related to the guru. 
Thoroughly train this mind of yours.
The essence of the teachings is found
In the practice of the luminous Great Perfection,
The awareness-emptiness of definitive meaning.
Apply its key points and do all that you can
To serve the teachings of the Ancient Translations
Through actions of your body, speech and mind. 
The views and writings of Rongzom, Longchenpa,
Ngari Paṇchen, Minling Terchen, Jigme Lingpa, Mipham,
And others in this lineage of vidyādharas are immaculate,
Untainted by the foul expulsions of the intellect.
Let us aspire that through teaching and through practice
The works of this tradition may flourish and spread. 
Thus, to fulfil the request of Zhichen Gyalse Kunnyi,
Who belongs to the noble family lineage of Nyang,
I, Chökyi Lodrö,
Wrote down whatever came to mind. Virtue! 
| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2022.

Bibliography
Tibetan Edition
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "Gzhi chen rgyal sras kun nyir gdams pa/" in 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 8: 238–240

Version: 1.0-20220215