The Many-Stringed Lute of Immortal Brahmā A Prayer for the Long Life of the Great Sixteenth Karmapa, Lord of the World
Oṃ svasti!
Supreme single embodiment of the wisdom
Of all the oceanic victors of the three times,
Mighty lord of the world, glorious Karmapa,
Rangjung Rigpé Dorje, may you reign supreme!
Your series of wondrous rebirths, like a chain of golden mountains,
Stands as a great offering-beacon of benefit and happiness
For the whole world—
May its light of blessings and auspiciousness bestow virtue and excellence!
In this northern land of snowy peaks in particular,
You were the powerful Gyalwa Chokyang, who attained the supreme siddhi,
And the successive incarnations of Düsum Khyenpa, Knower of the Three Times—
Guru to the beings of the three realms, may your life remain secure.
Just like the rabbit-bearing moon, which after waxing in stages
Finally arrives at its fullest extent,
You have reached the pinnacle of the four joys and sixteen wisdoms—
Mighty sovereign Vajradhara, may your life remain secure.
Lord of all the buddha families, Akṣobhya Vajrasattva,
The great crown in which the azure sky is concentrated—
Bearer of this symbol of power from which you’re never separate, 1
Lord of an ocean of maṇḍalas, may your life remain secure.
Outwardly the foremost of saffron-clad observers of precepts,
Inwardly replete with the elixir of the mind of awakening,
And secretly intoxicated with the wisdom of great bliss—
Victorious vajra-holder of the three sets of vows, may your life remain secure.
As light radiates from the solar disc of your perfect wisdom,
With love, you help disciples’ lotus-like intelligence to bloom,
And your strength and power render jungpo demons blind,
Essence of the bodhisattvas of the three families, 2 may your life remain secure.
You have bound tainted phenomena within the immaculate sphere,
Gained the supreme deathless vajra-kāya that is beyond transference,
And now your inexhaustible activity will endure throughout existence—
Supreme, incomparable nirmāṇakāya, may your life remain secure.
Exalted as a white lotus in this world of Jambudvīpa,
Nirmāṇakāya of whom wondrous accounts abound,
Dharma lord without peer in the three planes of existence—
King of Dharma, may your life remain secure for a hundred aeons.
Sole refuge for the teachings and beings in this age of strife,
Karmapa, the one who will awaken as Lion’s Roar,
For as long as earth, oceans and mountains endure,
May your lotus feet remain upon the vajra throne.
May the gurus, Three Roots and dharma guardians
Confer their true blessings upon these truthful words
Of prayer, so that they may swiftly be fulfilled
Without impediment and just as I aspire.
May the precious teachings of the Victorious Ones spread far and wide,
The communities of the saṅgha prosper and grow in number,
The splendours of spiritual and temporal perfection increase,
And all the worlds be favoured with the auspiciousness of virtue.
May the precious lineage of definitive accomplishment in particular
Spread throughout the world through teaching and through practice.
May this great earth be filled with hosts of scholars and adepts,
And may the light of excellence and auspiciousness expand.