A Lamenting Plea for Compassion
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Aho.
Treasury of wisdom, love and power:
Lerab Lingpa, care for me.
Look upon me from the luminous expanse,
And grant your blessings for evermore. 
In the palace on Cāmara’s mountain of glory,
In the ranks of the Mahāguru himself,
Together with an assembly of ḍākinīs—
How delightful it must be to revel so! 
But has the special emissary whom Padma appointed
To protect the Tibetan people
Really forsaken his Tibetan subjects
And travelled to this realm of Lotus Light? 
Can we withstand this,
Forsaken by your compassion,
When plagued perpetually
By the ills of this evil age?
For you to pass now into peace
Is surely a breakage of your pledge. 
Will the decline of your treasures,
So profound and so extensive,
Bring vast benefit to beings
Now and in the future? 
As a promoter of Padma’s sublime teaching,
You were without rival, like a great treasure.
Only father of mine, jewel upon my crown,
Hear now this lamentation of mine.
Arise in the form of a supreme emanation,
Who is both learned and accomplished,
And spread your destined treasure teachings
Throughout the threefold world. 
Having quenched the flames of Tibet’s malevolence
And brought happiness to rival the moon in splendour,
May you spread the Buddhist teachings in general
And especially those of the Ancient Translations. 
May your fourfold activity always be unobstructed,
And may you lead to liberation all with whom you are connected.
Through your bestowal of the supreme accomplishment,
May all be auspicious for your emanations in the three times.
And may this auspiciousness continue long into the future. 
Thus, Jamyang Lodrö Gyatso made this prayer spontaneously with a mind of unshakeable devotion.
| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2019 with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust.

Bibliography
Tibetan Edition
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "gdung dbyangs thugs rjes 'dzin/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir, H.P.: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. (BDRC W1KG12986). Vol. 8: 473–474

Version: 1.2-20220831