The Source of Abundant Merit: A Feast-Offering for the Secret Practice of the Great Compassionate One, Natural Liberation of Suffering from The Heart-Essence of the Vast Expanse 1. The Blessing 2. Inviting the Field of Accumulation 3. Offering the First Portion 4. Confession 5. Liberation and Offering 6. Dedicating the Remainder Offering 7. Invoking the Sacred Pledge 8. Invoking the Covenant 9. Maintaining the Relationship with the Tenma Goddesses 10. The Horse Dance 11. Receiving the Siddhis 12. Confession of Mistakes 13. Dissolution 14. Dedication and Aspiration 15. Verses of Auspiciousness
Namo lokeśvara-gaṇacakra-pūjā hoḥ
From my heart, the syllables raṃ , yaṃ , and khaṃ stream out
And purify any faults or defects in the feast offerings.
Oṃ , āḥ , and hūṃ transform the offerings into amṛta,
And sensual delights multiply until they are as infinite as space.
raṃ yaṃ khaṃ | oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Hūṃ. From Akaniṣṭha, realm of great bliss,
The Potala Mountain in the south,
The abode of the Great Compassionate One
And from the Tamer of Beings’ emanated pure realm,
All you deities in the maṇḍala of Natural Liberation of Suffering
We invite you to this feast gathering—come now, we pray.
The charnel ground’s hall of gathering is full of joy,
This gathering of ḍākinīs so heart-warming and inspiring,
Yogins and yoginīs so pure in their samaya,
These delectable feast offerings gleaming in splendour.
Come, shower down your blessings on this feast!
Grant us attainments, common and supreme!
Hūṃ. Deities of the three roots, in the Compassionate One’s maṇḍala,
Emanated deities of the Tamer of Beings,
We offer you this sumptuous feast of sensual delights.
Grant us attainments, common and supreme!
gaṇacakra-pūjā khāhi
Hūṃ. Throughout all our lives without beginning,
Any transgressions of the root or branch samayas
We have committed since entering the Great Vehicle’s Secret Mantra,
With this feast offering of sensory delights, we now confess!
vajra-samaya āḥ
Hūṃ. Ignorance, karma, destructive emotions and dualistic grasping,
And all the self- grasping and rudras they breed—
Let them be brought into this form— nṛ tṛ jaḥ .
Their consciousness released into the dharmadhātu— phaṭ !
And their body enjoyed as an offering in the ganachakra feast.
rudra sarva hala pañca pūjā khāhi
Hūṃ. You that dwell on the edge of the great maṇḍala —
Īśvarī, kiṃkara and laṅkā spirits—
Accept this remainder torma
And protect us yogins and yoginīs from obstacles to our accomplishing enlightenment.
Ucchiṣṭa-baliṃ te khāhi
Hūṃ. Rise up, deities of the Natural Liberation of Suffering!
Arise from the dharmadhātu in your wisdom form!
Crush any obstacles to our attaining enlightenment!
Halt any waning of the elements in environment and beings!
Heal any weakness in our channels, wind-energy and authentic presence! 4
And cause our practice to bear fruit!
Hūṃ. Long ago, in the Akaniṣṭha, heaven of great bliss,
In places full of joy, like the three god realms, 5
When the great secret tantras were being revealed,
You guardians of the Vajrayāna teachings
Were assigned places in keeping with your solemn samayas.
Then, in Tibet, the land of snows,
When the master Pema Tötreng 6
Turned the Dharma wheel of the secret mantras,
He seized the life-force, the heart, of all the chief gods and demons,
And enlisted them as protectors of the teachings.
Finally, in the pure realm of clear light,
And in the palace of great bliss,
The vidyādhara Pema Wangchen, 7
Was empowered by the Lotus-Born 8 and Drimé Özer, 9
With the profound seal of the Vast Expanse. 10
When the ḍākinī of the ultimate space of wisdom
Entrusted him with the symbolic script of this Luminous Expanse,
You, Za Rāhula ‘Life Force Razor ’ and the others,
Took a solemn oath to guard this teaching.
So, accept this offering torma with all its ornaments,
And carry out the four enlightened activities!
Hūṃ. You that obey the glorious Guru’s commands and protect Tibet,
Twelve Tenma goddesses—mothers and sisters—
Come! Accept this rinsing water of the torma,
And perform the tasks entrusted to you!
ma ma hriṃ hriṃ baliṅ te khāhi
Hūṃ. In this maṇḍala of the Compassionate One, Tamer of Beings,
All the damsi demons who corrupt and lead astray
Are suppressed beneath the seal of the nine vehicles.
Let them never rise again!
sthaṃ bha ya nen
Hūṃ. Deities of the maṇḍala of the Great Compassionate One:
The commitments of approach and accomplishment are fulfilled,
And the dawn of Vajrasattva is breaking.
The time has come to grant us the siddhis!
From the maṇḍalas of your body, speech, and mind, bless us
With the supreme and secret wisdom—that dwells neither in saṃsāra nor nirvāṇa,
And is the essence of the vajra body, speech and mind—
And grant us all the attainments, common and supreme,
Here and now—this very instant, we pray!
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ | kāya-vākka-citta a la la sarva-siddhi-phala hūṃ
Hūṃ. In this maṇḍala of the Great Compassionate One,
If our offerings were incomplete, our practice inattentive,
Or our meditation drowsy, dull or lifeless—
Please forgive all such error and confusion.
oṃ vajrasattva samayam anupālaya vajrasattva-tvenopa-tiṣṭha dṛḍho me bhava sutoṣyo me bhava supoṣyo me bhava anurakto me bhava sarva-siddhiṃ me prayaccha sarva-karma śuca me cittaṃ śreyaṅ-kuru hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ bhagavān sarva-tathāgata-vajra mā me muñca vajrī-bhava mahā-samaya-sattva āḥ
Hoḥ. Just like bubbles form and vanish on a stream,
The deities of the self-emanated maṇḍala
Dissolve back into the space of primordial wisdom— vajra muḥ !
In post-meditation, everything arises as the illusion-like form of the deity
Hoḥ. All sources of good accumulated in past, present and future,
We dedicate as the cause for every being to realize primordial omniscience.
May I and all those gathered here
Attain enlightenment together, in a single maṇḍala!
oṃ ye dharmā hetu prabhavā hetun teṣāṃ tathāgato hy avadat teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃ vādī mahāśramaṇaḥ svāhā
Hoḥ. Through the blessing of the lineage of vidyādharas,
The truth of the Three Jewels—Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha,
And the interdependent circumstances of profound Secret Mantra,
May all be auspicious, to pacify the eight fears! 11
May all be auspicious, for increasing longevity and merit!
May all be auspicious, to bring perception under our control !
May all be auspicious, to annihilate negative, misleading forces!
With all attachment to perception perfected as the form of the deity,
All sound purified into the great bliss of mantra,
All thoughts matured into the clear light of dharmakāya,
May all be auspicious, so that we attain the translucent rainbow body!