A Concise Recitation of the Preliminary Practice According to the New Treasure of Dudjom 1. The Preparation: Reciting the Four Contemplations which Turn the Mind 2. The Main Preliminary Practices 2.1 Taking Refuge 2.2 Bodhicitta: Developing the Mind of Awakening 2.3 Offering the Maṇḍala which Accumulates Merit and Wisdom 2.4 The Meditation and Recitation of Vajrasattva which Purifies Obscurations The Hundred-Syllable Mantra The Six-Syllable Mantra 2.5 The Swift Blessings of Uniting with the Mind of the Guru Four-Line Invocation Prayer Vajra Guru Mantra Receiving the Siddhis and Dissolution 2.6 The Transference of Consciousness (Phowa) 2.7 The Generosity of Giving One's Body and Dedicating the Merit
Homage! O lama, my unfailing and constant protector!
This free and endowed human birth is very difficult to obtain.
Everything that is born is by its nature impermanent and bound to die.
Beneficial and harmful actions bring their inevitable results.
The three realms of saṃsāra are an ocean of suffering.
Recognizing this, may my mind turn towards the Dharma.
From now until I obtain the essence of enlightenment,
I take refuge in the Lama, the Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha.
From now until saṃsāra itself is empty,
I shall strive for the benefit and well-being of all sentient beings (who were once my very own parents).
In all my lives, my body, my possessions and all my merits,
I offer to the Refuge (Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha) in order to accumulate merit and wisdom.
idam ratna maṇḍalakaṃ niryātayāmi
Above my head is the Lama, inseparable from Vajrasattva.
From his body flows a stream of nectar that purifies all our negative karma, destructive emotions, illnesses, destructive influences (negativity), and blockages due to digpa (negative actions) and dripa (obscurations).
Oṃ, the most excellent exclamation of praise,  Vajrasattva’s samaya:
O Vajrasattva, protect the samaya
May you remain firm in me
Grant me complete satisfaction
Grow within me (increase the positive within me)
Be loving towards me
Grant me all the siddhis
Show me all the karmas (activities)
Make my mind good, virtuous and auspicious!
Hūṃ! The heart-essence, seed-syllable of Vajrasattva
Ha ha ha ha! Symbolizes the four immeasurables, the four empowerments,  the four joys, and the four kāyas
Ho! The exclamation of joy at this accomplishment
O blessed one, who embodies all the vajra tathāgatas
Do not abandon me
Grant me the realization of the vajra nature
O great Samayasattva
Ā! Make me one with you
oṃ vajra sattva hūṃ
Lama Vajrasattva dissolves into light and becomes one with me.
I am transformed into Vajrayoginī; in the sky before me
My tsawé lama appears in the form of Guru Padmasambhava.
The embodiment of all the buddhas, past, present and future,
Incomparable tsawé lama I pray to you.
In this life and in the next, and in the bardo states, guide me with compassion.
Grant me your blessings continuously at all times.
oṃ āh hūṃ vajra guru padma siddhi hūṃ
I am fully empowered with the blessings of body, speech and mind of Guru Rinpoche.
vajra guru kāya vaka citta siddhi hūṃ
The Lama dissolves into light and becomes inseparable one with me.
Recognize one's own rigpa as the absolute Lama.
I pray to the protector Amitābha, the Buddha of Limitless Light,
By your blessings may I accomplish the profound path of phowa.
Now my body, my possessions, my merits and even their causes, all together
I surrender them to all beings with no remorse;
May I provide great benefit for all beings without hindrance.