The Fulfilment of All Aspirations In Praise of Noble Tārā
Homage to the venerable lady Ārya Tārā!
Arisen from the green syllable and an utpala , 1
You are green in colour, with one face and two arms,
Both your arms and your body decorated with jewels—
Chosen deity Tārā, to you I offer homage and praise.
Amoghasiddhi and the other buddhas of the five buddhas grace your crown;
You appear as a sixteen-year-old with smiling countenance,
Your overwhelming majesty forever subduing opponents—
Chosen deity Tārā, to you I offer homage and praise.
Your right hand bestows gifts, your left holds an utpala .
Upon a multicoloured lotus and sun disc,
You are perfectly poised with right leg extended and left drawn in,
Chosen deity Tārā, to you I offer homage and praise. 2
Constantly you gaze at beings with your eyes of compassion,
Tārās to protect from the eight fears emanate from your body,
And you bring freedom from all the sufferings of saṃsāra—
Chosen deity Tārā, to you I offer homage and praise.
Pacifying, enriching, magnetizing and wrathful,
As well as varied tasks, you rapidly accomplish them all,
And you swiftly carry out an ocean of enlightened activity—
Chosen deity Tārā, to you I offer homage and praise.
You who liberate us entirely from all the eight fears—
Of lions, elephants, fire, snakes, thieves and robbers,
Enslavement, drowning and flesh-eating demons—
Chosen deity Tārā, to you I offer homage and praise.
Karma accumulated in past lives, the mental afflictions,
And whatever intolerable harms we have committed,
Such as the five boundless crimes or ten negative deeds,
Let them all be purified—each and every one!
And likewise in this very life,
Let all bad dreams, evil omens, untimely death, enemies
And every form of inauspiciousness be cleared away,
And let our lifespan, merit and resources all increase.
For me, in all my lives to come,
May I recall the chosen deity Tārā,
Gain all the supreme and ordinary attainments,
Have all my wishes fulfilled just as I desire,
And master every form of activity without exception.
Through whatever merit I have acquired through praising
The chosen deity, compassionate Tārā,
With a mind of intense and ardent longing,
May I always be inseparable from you, O venerable Tārā!