The Moon’s Illusory Reflection to Gladden the Devoted A Prayer to the Successive Rebirths
Namo Mañjuśriye.
Embodiment of the wisdom of all the buddhas throughout space,
Only father of the victorious ones, noble treasury of knowledge,
Who dismantles the entanglements of delusion—
Transcendent conqueror Mañjughoṣa, to you I pray.
Supreme son of the King of Śākyas,
Best of men, famed as the Licchavi,
Known as Priyadarśana the Youthful—
Vimalakīrti, at your feet I pray.
Great heart-son of the heroic Garab Dorje,
Treasure of vast intelligence and limitless wisdom,
Magnificent pioneer of the teachings of the three classes and nine spaces—
Mañjuśrīmitra, at your feet I pray.
Perfecter of the four visions who matured into a body of awareness-light,
Inhabiter of indestructible vajra form at the Five-Peaked Mountain,
Elucidator of the essential teachings through various emanations—
Vimalamitra, at your feet I pray.
Preeminent among those who have accomplished Supreme Bliss,
Binder of all the phenomena of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa within the great circle, 1
You travelled to the celestial realm together with your consort—
Vajraghaṇṭapāda, to you I pray.
You reached the limits of fivefold scientific knowledge,
Gained supreme accomplishment through the path of mantra,
And were lauded by the learned ones of the noble land—
Great paṇḍita Anantamukhamati, to you I pray. 2
Mañjughoṣa himself emanating as a sovereign of the Land of Snows,
You constructed the great temple and spread the sūtra and mantra teachings,
And received the transmission of Assembly of Sugatas with marvellous aspiration—
Tri Songdetsen, at your feet I pray.
Born into the family of the dharma-king,
Cared for by the guru and entrusted with the Gathering of Transmitted Precepts, 3
You accomplished great benefit for teachings and beings in thirteen lifetimes—
Gyalse Lharje, at your feet I pray.
Padma’s heart-son from the family of Nub,
You gained genuine accomplishment and rode on the rays of the sun,
Becoming a court chaplain for Ngadak Tsangpa— 4
Namkhai Nyingpo, at your feet I pray.
Heart son who was cared for by the great master,
Langdro Lotsāwa, you shot thunderbolts like arrows,
And possessed the skill and power of magical intervention—
Könchok Jungne, at your feet I pray.
Heart-son of Marpa and recipient of the transmission of tummo practice,
Who, through extreme hardship gained supreme accomplishment in a single life,
Even to hear your name liberates from the terrors of the lower realms—
Mila Shepa Dorje, to you I pray. 5
Master of profound terma born in the family of Nyang,
Lord who possesses a diadem of blue-black locks,
You brought forth an ocean of profound treasures at Khoting and elsewhere—
Nyima Özer, at your feet I pray. 6
Protector of beings in this chilly Land of Snows
Against the causes and effects of mental afflictions and suffering,
The king of physicians in ordinary human form—
Yönten Gönpo, at your feet I pray. 7
Emanation of Tri Song, foremost of the saffron-robed,
Nāgārjuna in person, master of the teachings of the practice lineage,
Lord whose benefit to beings extends throughout this vast world—
Kyobpa Rinchen, at your feet I pray. 8
Born into the Khön family, preeminent among the learned, ethical and kind,
You disciplined all those beings who are difficult to train,
And were worshipped by the haughty with the jewels of their crowns—
Chögyal Pakpa, at your feet I pray. 9
Born in Lowo, you became a wise and learned lotsāwa,
Gained advanced realization through Red Mañjuśrī,
With limitless qualities of learning and accomplishment—
Sherab Rinchen, at your feet I pray. 10
Jamyang Sakyapa possessing the three supreme names, 11
You extended teaching, practice and activity to the far reaches of space,
Vast treasury of oceanic knowledge, love and capacity—
Sonam Gyaltsen, at your feet I pray. 12
You reached the distant shore of oceanic learning in outer and inner scriptural traditions
And perfected the great strength of Samantabhadra’s realization,
Great pioneer of the pinnacle of Vajra Luminosity—
Longchen Rabjam, at your feet I pray.
Further incarnation of the omniscient Dolpopa,
You were guided by Padma and looked after Tibet,
Crown ornament of all masters of unconventional conduct—
Thangtong Gyalpo, at your feet I pray. 13
Heart-son of the omniscient Kunga Zangpo,
Cakrasaṃvara emanating in saffron robes,
Lord of all who have mastered twofold bodhicitta—
Könchok Gyaltsen, at your feet I pray. 14
Outwardly, you wore the robes of threefold purity,
Inwardly, your being was suffused with bodhicitta,
Secretly, you reached the supreme level of Vajradhara—
Zhalu Khyenrab Chöje, to you I pray. 15
Blessed heir to Ratna Lingpa’s speech and mind,
You lived to a hundred and ten and sustained the profound terma teachings,
Accomplished in vidyā mantra, protector of the teachings and beings—
Tsewang Drakpa, at your feet I pray.
Deliberate incarnation of the great Sakya Paṇḍita,
Whom Padma foretold as an emanation of Vairotsana,
Skilled in the five sciences, the one known as Sakya Lotsāwa—
Jampé Dorje, at your feet I pray. 16
Emanation of the sovereign ruler’s enlightened qualities,
You were born in Lowo Matang in Ngari,
And impartially studied and practised an ocean of teachings—
Pema Wangyal, at your feet I pray. 17
Born in the Azha family, you were Tsarchen’s supreme heart-son,
Inseparable in your wisdom from Mañjughoṣa himself
And blessed by the supreme deities of the Three Roots—
Khyentse Wangchuk, at your feet I pray. 18
The Lord of Secrets manifesting as a white-robed householder,
A recipient of fierce mantras and lord of vidyā mantras,
You subjugated unruly and malevolent forces—
Tashi Tobgyal, at your feet I pray. 19
Emanation of Vimalamitra, infinitely pure of perception,
Universal monarch among masters of unconventional conduct,
Glorious heruka, great warrior Lhatsün—
Namkha Jigme, at your feet I pray. 20
Prophesied by the buddha in sūtras and tantras
As a supreme guardian to oversee the northern land,
Sole ornament of this world, revered by gods and men alike—
Ngawang Lobzang Gyatso, to you I pray. 21
Born as the physical heir of Gyurme Dorje, 22
You accomplished Hayagrīva and joined the family of the Mighty One’s speech;
With your vast intelligence you understood infinite fields of knowledge—
Pema Gyurme Gyatso, to you I pray. 23
Further incarnation, great hero of the Nyö clan,
You brought delight to all who saw you, even the gods,
And were a supreme bodhisattva benefitting others—
Tsangyang Gyatso, at your feet I pray. 24
Final birth of Langdro Lotsāwa, holder of profound terma teachings,
You accomplished the form of Padma Drakpo and subjugated the eight classes,
Becoming a conqueror to subdue elemental spirits in this degenerate age—
Longsal Nyingpo, at your feet I pray. 25
Your supreme affinity for the great vehicle was fully awakened,
Knots in your channels were undone, teachings poured forth from your expansive realization,
And you took control of the sky-like treasury of mind terma—
Jigme Lingpa, at your feet I pray.
Vimalamitra manifesting in the form of a renunciant,
Who, over seven lifetimes, brought vast benefit to the teachings and beings,
And was the fourth holder of the signs of irreversibility—
Mingyur Namkhé Dorje, to you I pray. 26
To the great emanation of the body of Yeshe Dorje,
The speech of Kunga, mind of Wangchok,
Qualities of Losal and activity of Khyentse Wangpo,
Who was Mañjughoṣa in person, I pray.
Emanation of Khyentse Wangpo’s activity,
All-pervasive lord of the maṇḍala with threefold kindness, 27
Inconceivable in your deeds to train beings of this degenerate age—
Chökyi Lodrö, at your feet I pray.
In future, in the emanated realm to the north,
In Shambhala, in the palace of the Kapala Court,
May I be inseparable from Kulika Raudracakrin,
The victorious one with a wheel in his hand.
Turn your loving attention to this prayerful child.
And, from now on, in all my future lives,
O supreme and noble master, guide and care for me,
And inspire me to accomplish my own and others’ benefit.
May the life of the Mañjughoṣa Guru long remain secure,
May the teachings and those who uphold them spread far and wide,
May all the current misery in the land of Tibet be pacified,
And may the splendour of happiness and joy enrich the entire world.