Emptying the Hells from Their Very Depths The Sovereign Practice for the Confession of All Impairments and Breakages of Vows and All Negative Actions and Obscurations Prostration The Forty-Two Peaceful Deities The Fifty-Eight Wrathful Deities The Kagyé Deities The Hundred-Syllable Mantra Confession of Downfalls Confession in the Expanse of the View Fulfilment Offerings i. Offering the Amṛta ii. Offering the Rakta iii. Offering the Tsok and Torma iv. Lamp Brief Fulfilment Offering
All the vidyādhara gurus and deities of the mandalas of peaceful and wrathful Victorious Ones are present in the sky before me. Vajra samāja !
Emaho! We call upon all the great enlightened beings from every place and time,
All you gurus, peaceful and wrathful Victorious Ones, turn your wisdom towards us,
Come now, take your places on seats of lotus, sun and moon,
And accept our prostrations and offerings, so that we may purify impairments and breakages, and even the lower realms.
To all the masters endowed with perfect qualities, we prostrate!
To the dharmakāya beyond concept or elaboration, we prostrate!
To the saṃbhogakāya, the perfect enjoyment of great bliss, we prostrate!
To the nirmāṇakāya lords, protectors of beings, manifesting in diverse forms, we prostrate!
To the vajrakāya of the unchanging natural state, we prostrate!
To the perfect kāya of complete awakening, we prostrate! 1
To the peaceful deities who pacify the afflictive emotions, we prostrate!
To the wrathful deities who annihilate mistaken views, we prostrate!
To the ‘Body of Gentle Splendour’, lord of means and master of life, we prostrate!
To the ‘Lotus-like Speech’ which resounds without error, we prostrate!
To the ‘Vajra Mind’ endowed with the true meaning, we prostrate!
To the ‘Healing Nectar’ which dispels the sickness of the five poisons, we prostrate!
To the deities of Kīlaya who vanquish arrogant demons, we prostrate!
To the hosts of mamos who control the five elements, we prostrate!
To the vidyādharas who have mastered the paths and stages, we prostrate!
To the oath-bound ones who guard the teachings, we prostrate!
To the lords of mantra who subdue enemies and obstacle-makers, we prostrate!
Hūṃ! Self-aware, self-knowing, and undeluded,
From the state of equality, pure wisdom arises—
So we may purify mind and objects, we prostrate
To Samantabhadra and his consort.
In enlightened wisdom, free from thought and undivided,
The five pure wisdoms shine as glowing lights—
So we may purify mind’s afflictions, we prostrate
To these five families of the bliss-gone buddhas.
Causes created out of basic space
Arise as partners of the five pure wisdoms—
So we may purify the elements, we prostrate
To these five great consorts of basic space.
A host of pure wisdom emanations
Manifests spontaneously for beings’ benefit—
So we may purify consciousness, we prostrate
To these eight great warriors of awakening.
In the state of wisdom, enlightened qualities are complete,
And the desired attainments fall like rain—
So we may purify space and time, we prostrate
To these eight great goddesses of offering.
Valiant beings, subduers of the malevolent,
Free from the faults of clinging to a self—
So we may purify wrong views, we prostrate
To these four takritas who guard the gates.
Those who bring benefit to beings through
Love, compassion, joy and equanimity—
To purify eternalism and nihilism, we prostrate
To these four gate-keeping ladies of wrath.
From six patterns of thought, six realms of saṃsāra
Arise through the force of unawareness—
So that we may purify delusion, we prostrate
To the six sages who tame through compassion.
Hūṃ! Expression of pure awareness, 'Always Excellent',
To Chemchok, chief of the mandala, we prostrate.
Five poisons, not abandoned but perfected,
To the wrathful herukas, we prostrate.
Arisen from basic space, uniting means and wisdom,
To the wrathful consorts, we prostrate.
Great secret ladies emanated from wisdom,
To the eight female furies, we prostrate.
Fanged and winged devourers, female messengers,
To the eight tramen goddesses, we prostrate.
Ladies who entice, capture, bind and enrapture,
To the four female gate-keepers, we prostrate.
Female emanations in worldly guise,
To the īśvarī goddesses, we prostrate.
Hūṃ! Yamāntaka, slayer of the Lord of Death,
Surrounded by terrifying hosts of haughty demons,
To the ‘Body of Gentle Splendour’, we prostrate.
Hūṃ! Hayagrīva, sovereign deity of power,
And a retinue skilled in magnetizing and subjugation,
To the ‘Lotus Speech’, we prostrate.
Hūṃ! Great and glorious Vajra Heruka,
Surrounded by a self-manifested retinue,
To the ‘Pure and Authentic Mind’, we prostrate.
Hūṃ! Mighty Chemchok Heruka,
And limitless peaceful and wrathful deities,
To the ‘Perfected Qualities’, we prostrate.
Hūṃ! Vajrakumāra, embodiment of activity,
With the ten wrathful ones blazing with fire,
To the ‘Enlightened Activity’, we prostrate.
Hūṃ! The heruka ‘Fully Perfected King’,
With a retinue formed of the five elements,
To the hosts of mamos, we prostrate.
Hūṃ! The vidyādhara ‘Mighty Vajra Wrath’,
Encircled by those on the paths and stages,
To the hosts of vidyādharas, we prostrate.
Hūṃ! Lord of Secrets, cloaked in blue,
Surrounded by arrogant worldly forces,
To the protectors of the teachings, we prostrate.
Hūṃ! Tobden Nakpo, powerful and strong,
Surrounded by masters of wrathful mantras,
To the subduers of enemies and obstructors, we prostrate.
Whoever prostrates upon hearing in this way
The names of the peaceful and wrathful victorious deities,
Will heal all impairments and breakages of samaya,
And purify the negativity of the five boundless crimes.
Even the lower realms will be emptied from their depths,
And proclaimed a buddha field of the vidyādharas.
Now all the faults of our past misdeeds,
We verbally disclose and mentally confess,
And purify with lamentation and remorse.
In devotion, we join our palms at our hearts,
And in faith, we prostrate ourselves entirely,
Calling on the peaceful and wrathful deities by name.
Then, with body and speech held firm,
We visualize Vajrasattva at our crowns,
And recite the essence of the Narak Dongtruk:
Ho! Vast array of peaceful and wrathful deities, turn your minds towards us,
Failing to follow the buddhas’ words and our teachers’ instructions,
We have fallen into error and confusion.
Our gracious vajra master
We have abused and looked upon mistakenly.
With cruel minds, harsh words, anger and attachment,
We have physically abused and brought real harm
Upon our consorts and dharma brothers and sisters—
All these impairments of the samaya of the body ,
We confess before the hosts of deities, peaceful and wrathful.
Failing to visualize the yidam deity and retinue,
Chanting and reciting incorrectly or with interruption—
All these impairments of the samaya of the speech ,
We confess before the five families, peaceful and wrathful.
Having pledged to maintain the ten secrets, 2
We announce them to all and reveal the sacred substances—
All these impairments of the samaya of the mind ,
We confess before the Victorious Ones, peaceful and wrathful.
Five samayas are there of recognition, 3
But not recognizing the five families, we view them falsely.
Five samayas are there of not abandoning, 4
But through ignorance, we stray into the five poisons.
Five samayas are there of accepting, 5
But we view clean and unclean, and are careless in our acts.
Five samayas are there of accomplishment, 6
But not knowing how to abide within, we go astray.
Five samayas are there of enactment, 7
But failing to discriminate, we act mistakenly.
All these impairments of the branch samayas,
In the presence of the yidam deities, we now confess.
Ignoring the meditations of approach and accomplishment,
Failing to offer on full and new moon days and at the six times, 8
Lazy, distracted, and overcome by drowsiness,
Hoarding and offering too little out of stinginess,
Acting like a ‘tsok wolf’, eating and drinking before it is time, 9
Polluting the first portion, and keeping the remainder,
Acting abruptly and without care and consideration—
All these faults of impairment, witting or unwitting,
We confess before the ḍākinīs and samaya-bound protectors!
All impairments of the samayas of mind, we now confess through the view.
In the state of the universal ground, the mind of awakening,
We realize the view in which there is no affirmation,
We experience the meditation in which nothing is negated,
And we realize the action without acceptance or denial.
In this mind of awakening, without hope or fear,
No breakage or impairment of any root or branch vows
Could ever occur or ever come to pass.
And beyond the duality of confessed and confession, we are freed!
Hūṃ! When the absolute space of phenomena is beyond elaboration,
How tiresome is the view of existence and non-existence!
How frustrating it is to cling to fixed ideas about reality!
In the expanse of bliss beyond elaboration, we confess!
When the state of Samantabhadra is beyond good or bad,
How tiresome is this view of pure and impure!
How frustrating to cling to ideas of good and evil!
In the expanse of bliss that is Samantabhadra, we confess!
When equalness is beyond all distinctions of size,
How tiresome is the view of self and other!
How frustrating to cling to the duality of great and small!
In the expanse of equality and perfect bliss, we confess!
When the mind of awakening is beyond birth and death,
How tiresome is the view of this life and the next!
How frustrating to cling to the duality of birth and dying!
In the unchanging expanse of deathlessness, we confess!
When the great bindu is beyond corners and edges,
How tiresome is this view of form and substance!
How frustrating to cling to shapes with sides and corners!
We confess in the expanse of the bindu, the perfect sphere!
In the state beyond change throughout the three times,
How tiresome is the view of beginnings and endings!
How frustrating to cling to ideas of change and transformation!
We confess in the expanse beyond the changes of past, present and future!
When naturally arising wisdom is neither to be sought for nor accomplished,
How tiresome is the dualistic view of cause and effect!
How frustrating to cling to ideas of effort and attainment!
We confess in the naturally arising, effortless expanse!
When the pure wisdom of rigpa is beyond eternalism and nihilism,
How tiresome is the dualistic view of perceiver and perceived!
How frustrating to cling to things as everlasting or non‑existent!
We confess in the expanse of pure awareness-wisdom!
When pure reality is beyond the elaboration of ideas,
How tiresome is the dualistic view of pain!
How frustrating to cling to a centre and extremes!
We confess in the expanse of utterly pure dharmatā!
When the celestial palace is beyond dimension,
How tiresome is this view of outside and inside!
How frustrating to cling to the duality of wide and narrow!
We confess in the boundless, unconfined expanse!
When the space of the consort is beyond high and low,
How tiresome is this view of upper and lower!
How frustrating to cling to the duality of above and below!
We confess in the expanse of the secret place beyond dimension!
When the dharmakāya is free of duality,
How tiresome is the view of outer and inner!
How frustrating to cling to the duality of worlds and inhabitants!
We confess in the immutable expanse of dharmakāya!
How sorrowful is the state of ignorant, deluded beings,
Who cling to signs of substance in what has no form!
How utterly mistaken are the minds of the deluded,
Perceiving an ‘I’ and a self in what is beyond arising!
Not knowing appearance and existence to be an illusion,
They feel attachment for wealth and possessions.
Not knowing that saṃsāra has no true reality,
They think friends and family, companions in delusion, will live forever.
How utterly mistaken are the minds of ignorant beings!
They reject the truth and put their energy into harmful deeds,
Spurning Buddha’s words, they fall prey to life’s addictions,
And apply their intelligence to tasks of meaningless distraction.
How pitiful are those whose lives lack meaning in this way!
In the expanse beyond dissipating or conserving, we confess!
Hūṃ! Unaltered and naturally arisen is this great substance,
Pure from the beginning, and thus beyond clean and unclean,
Eight principal and a thousand minor ingredients
For accomplishing the five families of the buddhas!
This is the great elixir that heals the samayas.
May the heart-aspirations of the naturally abiding buddhas
From the great all-pervading realm of Akaniṣṭha
Be now fulfilled with the light of the five wisdoms,
And by Samantabhadra’s cloud-like offerings.
May their enlightened intentions be fully realized,
And may compassionate emanations bring freedom to the six realms.
May this fulfil the heart-aspirations of Samantabhadra,
The original buddha of unchanging luminosity.
May it fulfil the heart-aspirations of infinite peaceful and wrathful deities,
The enlightened forms of pure wisdom arising from within.
Manifestations of compassion bringing benefit to beings,
Appear in a succession that begins with Vajradhāra.
Now, for all these guides to wandering beings,
With this offering of kāyas and buddha fields, may their heart-aspirations be all fulfilled!
And may their enlightened intentions be fully realized!
All our impairments and breakages of samaya, we now confess!
Hūṃ! Pure wisdom liquid, wet with dharmatā,
Whose colour is the red of ardent compassion,
It is the causal blood that generates life,
The self-arisen blood of the lotus rakta,
The vital blood of the ten fit for liberation,
The elemental blood from red herbal essences—
All of them pure substances of magnetizing,
Or impure causes for saṃsāra’s three realms.
Through the enlightened intentions of the heruka,
The habits of saṃsāra’s three worlds are liberated,
And it is blessed as a substance for offering.
To the great mother Samantabhadrī we offer,
So that pure wisdom may dawn in our minds.
To the hosts of wrathful herukas we offer,
So that their compassionate minds are invoked.
To all the mamos and ḍākinīs, we offer
As a substance to restore the samaya.
To all the Dharma protectors and guardians, we offer
So that they may carry out their activity.
May this fulfil their heart-aspirations and may they grant us accomplishment!
Hūṃ! Nourishing foods that sustain the three realms,
Grains and fruits, and foods with six different tastes, 10
Meat from the bodies of the ten who are liberated,
And distilled grains, the intoxicating drink of warriors—
Considering them as a rich and plentiful feast for the senses,
We make an offering of them all.
To the dharmadhātu, we make imagined offerings,
To the peaceful deities, we make beautiful offerings.
To the wrathful deities, we make majestic offerings,
To please the masters, we offer.
To delight the ḍākinīs, we offer.
To satisfy the guardians of the teachings, we offer.
As a support for fulfilling the samaya commitments, we offer.
Hūṃ! Inside a hundred lamps of the finest substance,
We now plant a hundred cleanest wicks,
And fill them all with melted butter, the essence of the elements.
Having lit these hundred brightly shining lamps,
With a wish to heal our impairments and breakages of samaya,
We now offer them to all the victorious buddhas.
Out of the dharmadhātu palace of Akaniṣṭha,
The five-coloured lights of wisdom shine in dazzling splendour—
May the heart-aspirations of infinite peaceful and wrathful ones be now fulfilled!
In the palace of Dharma at the heart,
Appears the tiklé, which is the seed of pure wisdom—
May the heart-aspirations of the self-arisen peaceful deities be fulfilled!
In the ‘skull-mansion’ palace of the brain,
The light-rays of naturally emitted warmth are all ablaze—
May the heart-aspirations of the self-arisen wrathful ones be fulfilled!
In the experience of faith and devotion,
Naturally arising rigpa appears unceasingly—
May the heart-aspirations of the vajra master be fulfilled!
In the subtle channels, wind-energies and essences,
Is natural awareness, vivid and clear—
May the heart-aspirations of the mamos and ḍākinīs be fulfilled!
In the universe’s vast realms of existence,
Appear the light-spheres of the planets and stars—
May the heart-aspirations of the oath-bound ones of the outer world be fulfilled!
May each and every impairment and breakage of samaya
Be purified through the strength of our samaya commitment!
And may you grant us the accomplishments, ordinary and supreme!
Hūṃ! Within this wondrous mandala of secret instructions,
We offer to all the masters and hosts of yidam deities.
We offer the lamp of the naturally arising space of phenomena,
Filled with the burning oil of pure awareness-wisdom.
We offer amṛta nectar of eight major and a thousand minor ingredients,
The five kāyas and the five pure wisdoms of awakening.
We offer the exquisite torma that fills its pure vessel,
A perfect and plentiful feast of every sensual delight.
We offer enjoyment of the red rakta of non-attachment,
In the expanse of the three entirely liberated realms of saṃsāra.
We offer the blend of a thousand grains, the warriors’ substance
Of powerful drink that generates majestic splendour.
A la la! We implore you, please accept them with delight!