The Treasury of the Four Activities: A Fire Offering for the Female Awareness-Holder (Rigdzin Yumka) Practice 5. Invitation, with Devotional Mind 6. Requesting the Deities to Be Seated and Homage 7. Offering of Sensory Objects 8. Praise and Aspiration
Homage to the Ḍākinī of the vajra sphere!
Out of the state of emptiness arise the offering ingredients and from the first letter of their names, each decorated with a bindu, come the nectar-like substances with the power to delight the deities and to encourage them to act unobstructedly.
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ ha ho hrīḥ
Āh! All phenomena are naturally unarisen,
In the expanse of the Lady Dhātviśvarī (space),
Is the hearth for perfecting the four activities,
In the spacious expanse of Buddhalocanā (earth) and Māmakī (water)
The fire god without faces or arms,
The great consort Pāṇḍarāvasinī (fire).
Her interaction with Samayatārā (wind)
Creates the blazing expanse.
The celestial palace is beyond cause and condition: 1
The single entrance symbolises the single sphere 2 of all-pervading space.
In the centre of the palace blazing with great bliss,
Upon the heart of a blossoming lotus
And a sun-disc seat, stands the foremost of the ḍākinīs:
In the expanse of dharmakāya she is Samantabhadrī,
In the sambhogakāya realm she is Vajravārāhī,
And in nirmāṇakāya form she is Yeshe Tsogyal.
She has one face and two hands; her body is red in colour.
She is naked, standing in the posture of equanimity, yet ready to act.
Passionate and smiling,
She holds in her right hand a small skull-drum, 3
Which she plays at the level of her ear.
In her left hand she holds a hooked knife, the handle
Resting on her hip; her bearing is imposing and graceful.
Her bhaga is expanded and her breasts swell.
She is adorned with jewels and youth-ornaments;
And wears a garland of white lotus flowers. 4
The six bone ornaments adorn her body, 5
Her black, glistening hair is plaited,
And her jewelled diadem shines majestically.
Her central eye gazes upwards into all-encompassing space.
Her right sambhogakāya eye gazes straight ahead and tames beings.
Her left nirmāṇakāya eye gazes downwards and summons the three realms.
In her body the maṇḍalas of all the classes of tantra are perfectly complete.
She is surrounded by a vast assembly of hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs.
The lord of the families is Mighty Lotus with Skull-Garland. 6
The youthful ācārya has a light complexion and is smiling.
He appears in the form of a heruka and plays a small skull-drum and bell.
The samaya and wisdom deities are indivisible.
Merely by meditating on them I gain accomplishment.
Hūṃ! In the country known as India,
In the supreme land of Oḍḍiyāna
Is Dhumathala, city of the ḍākinīs;
Cāmaradvīpa, supreme island among islands.
In reality they are the unexcelled great blissful pure land;
In appearance they are the manifested celestial realms.
From all those lands, wherever you dwell in delight,
The great dharmakāya mother Tsogyal,
Together with your retinue of hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs,
Please approach and grant your blessings.
Please bestow your blessings on this excellent place.
Grant us excellent meditators the four empowerments, 7
Dispel hindrances, wrong guides and obstacles.
And bestow supreme and common attainments.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra jñāna ḍākinī e aralli pheṃ pheṃ ja
Ho! The samaya deity and wisdom deity,
Primordially indivisible, are the vajra seat.
The ḍākinī who is the miraculous manifestation of mind,
Innate [wisdom], to you I pay homage.
namo nama hūṃ
Ho! All phenomena that appear and exist
Arise as the ornaments of the five sense pleasures.
This great wish-fulfilling treasure of the mind,
We present as a delightful offering beyond acceptance and rejection.
vajra jñāna ḍākinī puṣpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda mahāmudrā rakta pañca baliṃ te sarva pūja āḥ hūṃ
Hūṃ! Vajrayoginī, mother of all the buddhas;
Prajñāpāramitā, the universal mother;
Manifested as the mother Tsogyal, joyful, passionate and smiling;
Consort of Buddha Padma(sambhava), to you I offer homage and praise.
Your body is attractive, with youthful and auspicious marks and signs;
Your speech liberates upon hearing, with ceaseless signs;
Your mind generates the wisdom of bliss and emptiness upon recollection;
Queen of the ḍākinīs, princess of Kharchen, to you I offer praise.
The supreme consort who bestows the sixteenfold bliss, 8
By absorption in the meditation of your illusory clear vision,
May the outer, inner and other, 9 and the elements of channels, wind and essence
Be purified in the vast expanse of Samantabhadrī!
Hūṃ! The filler and pourer have the pure nature of
The mouths of all the deities of the maṇḍala.
With the letters HŪṂ on their vajra tongues
They consume the offerings as a flow of nectar.
Vajravārāhī at Yumka’s heart is pleased,
And through the emanation of light rays [in colours] corresponding to the four activities
Supreme and ordinary siddhis are obtained.
oṃ padmo yoginī jñāna vārāhī sarva pāpaṃ śāntiṃ kuru svāhā
For this practitioner and for all my benefactors, may all illnesses, harmful influences, negative actions, obscurations, adverse circumstances, obstacles, repetitions or omissions in the rituals of secret mantra, impairments or breakages of samaya, downfalls and transgressions of the ḍākinīs’ commands be pacified and purified—śāntiṃ kuru svāhā!
oṃ vajra vastaye svāhā
vajra tāmbulāya svāhā
Oṃ. Bring about the welfare of beings!
Grant us the appropriate attainments!
And, having gone to the buddha realms,
Come back to us again, we pray!
Whatever virtue has been accumulated
Through this fire offering
In the maṇḍala of the ḍākinī
I dedicate towards all beings’ enlightenment.
Ho! Where all that appears and exists is the pure celestial sphere,
May we meet the Vajrayoginī of unchanging great bliss,
The ultimate Vajravārāhī endowed with all supreme attributes
And attain complete enlightenment!