The Heart of Blessings A Brief Anthology of Prayers to Guru Rinpoche and the Twenty-Five Disciples, the King and Subjects Taking refuge and arousing the awakened mind of bodhicitta The visualization Invocation The seven branch offering Prayer to Guru Rinpoche, his manifestations and the twenty-five disciples The mantra recitation Receiving the empowerments Dissolution
Homage to the Guru!
From now until enlightenment, I and all sentient beings
Take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha, and in the gurus, devas and ḍākinīs.
In order to attain perfect buddhahood for the sake of others,
I arouse the heart of the awakened mind—bodhicitta, in aspiration and action!
Before me in the sky, amidst a cloud of exquisite offerings,
On a jewelled lion throne, lotus, sun and moon disc seat
Presides my root master Orgyen Rinpoche,
His complexion white, tinged with red, he is youthful, majestic and radiant,
In his right hand a vajra, in his left a skull cup with vase,
Embracing the supreme secret consort, concealed as a khaṭvāṅga.
He wears inner gown, Dharma robes and brocade cape,
On his head the beautiful hat that liberates upon seeing;
He sits upright, his feet crossed in the vajra posture.
From his secret body, speech and mind, amidst a mass of light and rainbow rays,
The five classes of Tötreng, the eight manifestations,
His twenty-five heart-disciples, the king and subjects,
And an infinite cloud of vidyādhara gurus, all stream out.
Their three centres are marked by the three syllables oṃ āḥ hūṃ, from which light beams out
To summon the wisdom beings, who merge inseparably one with them.
Hūṃ! Rise up, Padmākara, with your ḍākinī throng,
Care for us, sugatas of all time and all directions,
Great and noble guide, Pema Tötreng Tsal,
Come now, we pray, from the sacred places of vidyādharas and ḍākinīs.
Remain upon your lion thrones, your lotus, sun and moon disc seats.
With devotion filling body, speech and mind, I prostrate and take refuge in you.
I offer a cloud of offerings, outer, inner, secret and unsurpassed,
I confess and purify all harmful actions and obscurations of past, present and future,
I rejoice in the virtuous actions of both sublime and ordinary beings,
I implore you to turn the wheel of the teachings, profound and vast,
I pray that you do not pass into nirvana, but remain forever,
And I dedicate all true merit to the complete enlightenment of all.
You are the embodiment of all the Conquerors, past, present and future—the lord of one hundred buddha families,
You rule over the four enlightened activities,
You possess the power to magnetize everything that appears and exists,
Padmākara, at your feet we pray!
Vajra, Ratna, Padma, Karma
And Buddha—the five supreme families of Tötreng;
The immortal Padmākara, Padmasambhava,
Loden Choksé, Pema Gyalpo,
Shakya Sengé, Nyima Özer,
Sengé Dradok, Dorjé Drolö and the like,
Assuming every kind of miraculous manifestation needed to tame beings, and
Embodying every source of refuge: to you we pray!
Sangyé Yeshé, Gyalwa Chokyang,
Namkhé Nyingpo, Jñānakumāra,
Yeshé Tsogyal, Palgyi Yeshé and
Palgyi Sengé, to you we pray!
Vairotsana, King Trisong Detsen,
Yudra Nyingpo, Dorjé Dudjom,
Yeshé Yang, Sokpo Lhapal and
Nanam Yeshé, to you we pray!
Palgyi Wangchuk, Denma Tsemang,
Kawa Paltsek, Shübu Palgyi Sengé,
Gyalwé Lodrö, Drokben Lotsawa and
Drenpa Namkha, to you we pray!
Odren Wangchuk, Ma Rinchen Chok,
Palgyi Dorjé, Langdro Könchok Jungné and
Gyalwa Changchub—you who actualized the wisdom mind of the buddhas—
Vidyādharas and heart-disciples, to you we pray!
To you we pray, Orgyen Rinpoche,
Inspire us with your blessings, assembly of vidyādhara emanations,
Pacify our obstacles, inner, outer and secret,
Make all our aspirations be spontaneously fulfilled,
Bestow on our body, speech and mind the four vajra empowerments,
Dispel illness, döns, harmful actions, obscurations and obstacles into space,
Grant us the siddhis of enlightened body, speech, mind, qualities and activities,
Inspire us with your blessings, to obtain the four kāyas of complete enlightenment!
From the four centres of the body of the vidyādhara guru,
Rays of light streak out and melt into my four centres,
Instilling in me the blessing of enlightened body, speech, mind and indestructible wisdom,
So that I receive the four empowerments.
Finally, the field of merit melts into light and dissolves into me.
The lama’s wisdom mind merges, one, with my mind, the great power of realization is perfected,
With samsara and nirvana one taste, within the all-embracing space of clear light,
Let all be auspicious for the fruition, the benefit of myself and others, to mature.