Brief Vajrasattva Visualisation and Mantra Recitation
In the Buddha, the Dharma and the Supreme Assembly
I take refuge until I attain enlightenment.
Through the merit of practising generosity and so on,
May I attain buddhahood for the benefit of all beings.
I am in my ordinary form.
Above my head, on a white lotus and moon,
Is the guru Vajrasattva,
Brilliant white and holding vajra and bell.
Amidst his own radiance, he embraces white Vajragarvā, 1
Who holds a hooked knife and skullcup.
They are seated in vajra and lotus postures
And wear silk and jewel ornaments.
At Vajrasattva’s heart, upon a moon disc is Hūṃ,
Encircled by the hundred-syllable mantra.
For me and all other sentient beings,
Let all our misdeeds, obscurations, downfalls and impairments of vows and commitments,
Be purified, each and every one, I pray.
From his body flows a stream of nectar
That removes illnesses, harmful influences, misdeeds, downfalls, and samaya pollution,
Expelling them in the form of smoke, soot, steam, pus, blood,
And tiny creatures.
The nectar then fills the whole interior of the body.
oṃ vajrasattva samayam anupālaya vajrasattva-tvenopa-tiṣṭha dṛḍho me bhava sutoṣyo me bhava supoṣyo me bhava anurakto me bhava sarva-siddhiṃ me prayaccha sarva-karma śuca me cittaṃ śreyaṅ-kuru hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ bhagavān sarva-tathāgata-vajra mā me muñca vajrī-bhava mahā-samaya-sattva āḥ hūṃ phaṭ
oṃ vajrasattva āḥ
O protector! In my ignorance and delusion
I have gone against and corrupted my samaya.
Lama protector, be my refuge!
Chief of all the maṇḍalas, vajra holder,
Embodiment of great compassion:
Chief of all living beings, in you I take refuge! 2
I confess all my impairments of the root and branch samayas of the body, speech and mind.
I implore you: let my negative actions, obscurations, wrongdoing and downfalls—all my flaws—be completely cleansed and purified!
The guru is pleased and grants purification.
He melts into light and dissolves into me.
Through the positivity and merit of this, may I swiftly
Attain the realization of Vajrasattva, and thereby
Every single sentient being
Reach his state of perfection too.