The Rain of Virtue and Goodness A Short Practice for Consecrating Representations of Enlightened Body, Speech and Mind The Extremely Concise Version Introduction 1. Elimination of Obstacles i. Peaceful ii. Semi-Wrathful iii. Wrathful a. Invocation b. Offering c. Praise d. Purifying with Subjugating Activity 2. Cleansing Ritual Drying with Finest Cloths Offering Garments 3. Generation of the Deities 4. Invitation 5. Invocation and Dissolution of the Jñānasattva into the Samayasattva 6. Sealing 7. Empowerment For dressing in armour recite: 8. Opening the Eyes 9. Transformation of the Representations 10. Offering and Praise 11. Prayer Mantra of The Essence of Interdependent Origination:
The mantra mālā emanates from my heart centre,
Coils around the mantra cord and goes into the vase, invoking the deities’ wisdom minds,
Through the emanation and absorption of rays of light, the twofold benefit is accomplished,
A stream of bodhicitta nectar flows from every part of their enlightened forms and fills the inside of the vase.
oṃ vajra arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda pratīccha svāhā
With bodies as numerous as atoms in the universe,
And with the most intense devotion,
We offer homage and prostrations
To all those who are worthy of praise.
Through offering the water of the conch with OṂ, ĀḤ and HŪṂ, the deities of the vase melt into light and merge inseparably with the water in the vase.
oṃ akāro mukhaṃ sarva-dharmānāṃ ādy-anutpannatvāt oṃ āh hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
oṃ sarva vighnān namaḥ saravatathāgatebhyo viśva-mukhebhyaḥ sarvathā-khaṃ udgate spharaṇa imaṃ gagana-khaṃ gṛhṇa idaṃ baliṃ te svāhā
oṃ sumbhani sumbhani hūṃ | gṛhṇa gṛhṇa hūṃ | gṛhṇāpaya gṛhṇapāya hūṃ | ānaya ho bhagavān vidyārāja krodha hūṃ phaṭ
vajra mahāśrī heruko ‘haṃ
Instantaneously I become Vajra Hūṃkāra, awesome and terrifying, king of the wrathful herukas. At my forehead is a syllable OṂ, at my throat a syllable ĀḤ, and at my heart a syllable HŪṂ.
From the syllable HŪṂ rays of light stream out, invoking infinite clouds of wrathful ones. Vajrasamājaḥ!
oṃ vajrakrodha rāja sa-parivāra arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda pratīccha svāhā
Hung! You who proclaim the terrifying ‘Hūṃ!’
And overcome all obstacle makers without exception,
Deities who grant us all the siddhis,
Enemies of the obstructing forces, to you I prostrate and offer homage!
Namo! Through the power of the truth of the glorious and noble root and lineage masters,
The truth of the buddhas,
The truth of the Dharma,
The truth of the Sangha,
The truth of secret mantra,
And vidyā mantras,
Dhāraṇī mantras,
And essence mantras,
And mudrās,
And states of samādhi,
And the truth of the total purity of the nature of phenomena,
And the truth of the infallible law of cause and effect governing all conditioned phenomena,
And through the blessing of great truth, we the vajradharas gathered here, generate twofold bodhicitta.
More immediately, in order to bring about vast benefit in this world and
Ultimately, to lead all sentient beings to the result of non-abiding nirvana, may all who would obstruct the consecration (rabné) of these representations of the sugatas’ enlightened body, speech and mind,
And all you malevolent jungpo demons who seek to bring us harm, together with all your servants and retinues, remain no longer in this place, but go elsewhere!
If you do not depart, then may your heads be split into a hundred parts by the powerfully blazing vajra fire of wisdom wrath arising from non-dual wisdom, the enlightened mind of all the tathāgatas.
oṃ sumbhani sumbhani hūṃ | gṛhṇa gṛhṇa hūṃ | gṛhṇāpaya gṛhṇapāya hūṃ | ānaya ho bhagavān vidyārāja hūṃ phaṭ
Transcendent, accomplished conquerors, tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly and completely enlightened buddhas who are endowed with insight and worthy of reverence,
Sugatas, knowers of the entire world,
Guides and tamers of beings,
Unsurpassable ones, teachers of gods and humans, buddha bhagavats, together with your disciples and heirs, with these material substances we offer you this cleansing of your enlightened forms!
To a bathing chamber filled with soothing scents, 1
With brightly sparkling floors of crystal,
And fine pillars all shimmering with gems,
Where hang gleaming canopies of pearls,
We invite the buddhas and their bodhisattva heirs.
We request you: Come and bathe yourselves in scented water,
Poured from overflowing jugs made of exquisite jewels,
All the while accompanied by melody and song.
Just as the gods cleansed your body
Moments after you took birth,
With the purest water of the gods,
We too, cleanse your body in this way.
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
Then let us dry you in cloths beyond compare,
Immaculate and anointed well with perfumed scent,
oṃ hūṃ trāṃ hrīḥ āḥ kāya viśodhanaye svāhā
This is the supreme, most glorious cleansing,
The water of compassion is unsurpassed,
With the consecrated wisdom water,
Grant us whatever siddhis we desire.
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
This water, with the nature of generosity,
Cleanses the stains of stinginess.
With this water perfumed with the finest scent of giving,
We cleanse well your enlightened forms.
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
This water, with the nature of discipline,
Cleanses the stains of misconduct,
With this water perfumed with the finest scent of discipline,
We cleanse well your enlightened forms.
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
This water, with the nature of patience,
Cleanses the stains of aggression,
With this water perfumed with the finest scent of love,
We cleanse well your enlightened forms.
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
This water, with the nature of diligence,
Cleanses the stains of laziness,
With this water perfumed with the finest scent of diligence,
We cleanse well your enlightened forms.
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
This water, with the nature of meditation,
Cleanses the stains of distraction,
With this water perfumed with the finest scent of concentration,
We cleanse well your enlightened forms.
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
This water, with the nature of wisdom,
Cleanse the stains of misguided intelligence,
With this water perfumed with the finest scent of wisdom,
We cleanse well your enlightened forms.
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
Then let us dry you in cloths beyond compare,
Immaculate and anointed well with perfumed scent.
oṃ hūṃ trāṃ hrīḥ āḥ pañca kāla viśodhanaye svāhā
With the most sublime of fragrant perfumes,
That gently permeates throughout a billion worlds,
We will anoint the bodies of all the buddhas,
Gleaming brightly, like pure and burnished gold. 2
oṃ vajra ghandhe svāhā
Then let us dress you finely in the most excellent of garments,
Lightly scented and dyed in vivid colours. 3
We offer clothing made of the finest gentle fabrics,
And hundreds of the most beautiful adornments. 4
oṃ vajra vastrāya pratīccha svāhā
oṃ vajrāmṛtakuṇḍali hana hana hūṃ phaṭ
oṃ svabhāva śuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāva śuddho ‘haṃ
Out of the state of emptiness the representations of enlightened form, stūpas, shrines and so on appear as a syllable OṂ upon a jewelled throne supported by lions and piled up multi-coloured lotus, sun and moon seats. From the OṂ appears a white wheel marked with a syllable OṂ, out of which manifests Vairocana, white in colour, and holding a wheel in his right hand and a bell in the left.
He is in union with white Locanā who holds a wheel in her right hand and a bell in her left.
The texts appear on a throne supported by peacocks with multi-coloured lotus, sun and moon disc seats as a syllable maṇḍala out of which manifests a lotus. From the syllable ĀḤ arises Amitābha, red in colour, holding a lotus in his right hand and a bell in his left.
He is in union with red Pāṇḍaravāsinī who bears a lotus in her right hand and rings a bell with her left.
The insignia appear on a throne of jewels supported by elephants and multi-coloured lotus, sun and moon seats as a syllable HŪṂ, out of which manifests a vajra. From the syllable HŪṂ arises Akṣobhya, blue in colour, and holding a vajra in his right hand and a bell in the left.
He is in union with blue Dhātviśvarī who holds a vajra in her right hand and a bell with her left.
All are peaceful and smiling, with all the marks and signs, in the full bloom of youth, wearing all the silken garments and jewel ornaments, and emanating infinite rays of light.
At the crown of their heads is a white OṂ,
At their throats a red ĀḤ,
And at their hearts a blue HŪṂ.
Rays of light emanate from the HŪṂ at my heart and at the heart of the image and invoke the wisdom mandalas, beyond the imagination. Om vajra samadza!
Protectors of all sentient beings,
Who vanquished all the maras and their armies,
You who know all things just as they are,
Buddhas, together with your retinue, come here, we pray!
Just as the Buddha in Tuṣita,
In his emanation as Śvetaketu, the son of the gods,
Enthroned Lord Maitreya as his regent,
Then considered the whole world in five visions,
And descended in the form of a mighty white elephant to enter the womb,
Buddhas of the supreme families—Vajra, Ratna, Padma,
Karma and Tathāgata—
In all the ten directions, together with your heirs,
At this very time, invited here through our devotion,
Come now, and enter these supreme representations.
In your compassion for us and other beings,
Through your miraculous powers,
Remain here, we pray,
For as long as we continue to make offerings.
padma kamalāyas tvaṃ
oṃ vajra puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda pratīccha svāhā
oṃ vajra-aṅkuśa jaḥ | oṃ vajra-pāśa hūṃ | oṃ vajra-sphoṭa baṃ | oṃ vajra-aveśa hoḥ
Oṃ! Possessors of the glorious buddha form,
The body of the inseparable three vajras,
Bestow here and now the empowerment
Of the precious body of all the buddhas.
oṃ sarva tathāgata mahākāya vajra svabhāva ātmako ‘haṃ
Āḥ! Possessors of the glorious buddha speech,
The speech of the inseparable three vajras,
Bestow here and now the empowerment
Of the precious speech of all the buddhas.
oṃ sarva tathāgata mahāvāka vajra svabhāva ātmako ‘haṃ
Hūṃ! Possessors of the glorious buddha mind,
The mind of the inseparable three vajras,
Bestow here and now the empowerment
Of the precious mind of all the buddhas.
oṃ sarva tathāgata mahācitta vajra svabhāva ātmako ‘haṃ
From the seed syllable at my heart emanate rays of light, invoking the empowerment deities—the buddhas of the five families, together with their heirs. Vajrasamājaḥ!
oṃ vajra arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda pratīccha svāhā
Although the dharmakāya is indivisible like space,
The rūpakāya appears like rainbows, separate and distinct.
Sugatas of the five families, masters of supreme means and wisdom,
To you, we prostrate and offer praise!
Just as Vajradhara bestowed empowerment,
The source of power and qualities,
For the sake of protecting beings,
Grant it here in the just same way, we pray!
Through this request of ours, all the tathāgatas who fill the whole of space direct their wisdom minds and grant empowerment,
The female buddhas grant empowerment with streams of water flowing from vases,
The bodhisattvas sing songs of auspiciousness,
Goddesses hoist parasols, banners and the like, and to the strains of sweet music, bring down a rain of offering substances,
And wrathful deities drive away obstructing forces.
The heart of every sentient being is filled with auspiciousness.
Embodiment of all, supreme lord of all the buddha families,
You who generate all sentient beings, embodiment of perfect bliss,
Let everything be auspicious now for the granting of this empowerment!
Just as the gods cleansed your body
Moments after you took birth,
With the purest water of the gods,
Likewise I now bestow empowerment.
oṃ sarva tathāgata abhiṣekate samaya śrīye hūṃ
Through this empowerment, from the remainder of the water which purifies the stains of the body swirling around at the top of the head, Vairocana and so on appear as the crown of the five buddha families.
oṃ hūṃ trāṃ hrīḥ āḥ pañca kūla mukuṭa abhiṣiñca māṃ
oṃ truṃ
oṃ vajra tuṣye ho
Just as the king of surgeons,
Removes the cataracts of the world,
Now may the buddhas’ wisdom eyes
Be opened for the benefit of all!
oṃ cakṣu cakṣu samanta cakṣu viśodhane svāhā
May you gain the eyes of wisdom, utterly pure, with the power to see for beings' benefit!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ svāhā
The visualized deities transform completely, and the representations of enlightened body, speech and mind appear once again, clear and distinct, complete with all powers and blessings.
We present offerings that fill the whole of space in all directions—
Drinking water, water to bathe the feet, flowers, incense,
Lamps, scented water, food, music and the like—
Vast ocean-like clouds of offerings, just like those created by Samantabhadra.
oṃ sarva tathāgata arghaṃ pratīccha pūja megha samudra spharaṇa samaye hūṃ
oṃ sarva tathāgata pādyaṃ  pratīccha pūja megha samudra spharaṇa samaye hūṃ
oṃ sarva tathāgata puṣpe pratīccha pūja megha samudra spharaṇa samaye hūṃ
oṃ sarva tathāgata dhūpe pratīccha pūja megha samudra spharaṇa samaye hūṃ
oṃ sarva tathāgata āloke pratīccha pūja megha samudra spharaṇa samaye hūṃ
oṃ sarva tathāgata gandhe pratīccha pūja megha samudra spharaṇa samaye hūṃ
oṃ sarva tathāgata naivedye pratīccha pūja megha samudra spharaṇa samaye hūṃ
oṃ sarva tathāgata śabda pratīccha pūja megha samudra spharaṇa samaye hūṃ
To all you buddhas and your heirs—
We offer these seven precious emblems of sovereignty,
Those arranged here, as well as those produced by the mind,
Through this, may beings enjoy inexhaustible treasures!
oṃ sapta mahāratna vajra pūjite āḥ hūṃ
We imagine all the most perfect sights, sounds, fragrances, tastes and textures,
Throughout the whole of space and time,
And offer them now to the buddhas and their heirs:
Please accept them and grant us the most supreme accomplishments, we pray!
oṃ pañca kāmaguṇa pūjite āḥ hūṃ
Although the dharmakāya is indivisible like space,
The rūpakāya appears like rainbows, separate and distinct.
Sugatas of the five families, masters of supreme means and wisdom,
To you we prostrate and offer praise!
With bodies as numerous as atoms in the universe,
And with the most intense devotion,
We offer homage and prostrations
To all those who are worthy of praise.
To every buddha, we make offerings:
Of the loveliest flowers, of beautiful garlands,
Of music and perfumed ointments, the best of parasols,
The brightest lamps and finest incense.
To every buddha, we make offerings:
Exquisite garments and the most fragrant scents,
Powdered incense, heaped as high as Mount Meru,
Arranged in perfect symmetry.
Saluting them with an endless ocean of praise,
With the sounds of an ocean of different melodies
We sing of the buddhas’ noble qualities,
And praise all those who have gone to perfect bliss.
Until the destruction at the end of the aeon
By earth, water, fire and wind,
May you, the buddhas, remain here
For the sake of all sentient beings.
Remain here, one with these images and objects,
Continually bringing benefit to beings,
Grant us freedom from illness, long life, power and prosperity, and
Make everything supremely auspicious, we pray!
All you buddhas and bodhisattvas who dwell throughout the ten directions, think of us!
Until all beings, as infinite as space itself, are brought to the state of perfect nirvana beyond extremes, may you victorious ones remain here constantly, without passing into nirvāṇa!
In particular, may you remain here until these representations of enlightened body, speech and mind are destroyed by the four elements.
And, as you remain here, may you grant us and all other beings all the supreme and ordinary siddhis!
oṃ ye dharmā hetu prabhavā hetun teṣāṃ tathāgato hy avadat teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃ vādī mahāśramaṇaḥ svāhā 6
Once again, in the sky before us, there appear all the buddhas and their bodhisattva heirs from throughout the whole of space and time, deities filling the whole of space, and sages who have the power to proclaim the truth. They sing songs of auspiciousness and bring down a great rain of mandārava flowers, so that the three worlds are flooded with the light of virtue and goodness.
Possessing every excellence, like a mountain of burnished gold,
Lords of the three worlds who have abandoned the three types of flaw—
Buddhas, your eyes like lotuses in bloom,
May you grant us auspiciousness here and now!
The teachings they impart are sublime and unchanging,
Famed throughout the three worlds, honoured by gods and humans,
The sacred Dharma which grants peace to all living beings,
May you grant us auspiciousness here and now!
Those who possess the Dharma and are rich with the fortune of learning,
The Sangha, worshipped by humans, gods, and demi-gods,
Most supreme of communities, modest, and glorious,
May you grant us auspiciousness here and now!
Through the power of the merit of the buddhas and their heirs,
The noble intentions of all the gods,
The force of secret and vidyā mantras,
And the proclamations of those who speak truth,
May our merit be as firm and stable as a mountain,
May holders of the lineage appear as clearly as the sun and moon,
And may our fame and glory spread as far and wide as the sky itself—
May all be virtuous for these three to happen here and now!
May the 80,000 classes of obstructing forces all be pacified,
May we be freed from all adversity and harm,
And may all our circumstances be favourable and perfect in every way—
May all be virtuous for these four to happen here and now!
May we live a hundred years and meet a hundred teachers,
May our lives be long and healthy, with every happiness and joy,
And may we always have renunciation and the wish to practise the supreme vehicle,
May all be virtuous for these five to happen here and now!
Practising generosity, observing discipline,
Cultivating patience, applying diligence,
Resting in meditation and realizing reality—
May all be virtuous for these six to happen here and now!
May the day be well, may the night be well,
May the mid hours bring happiness too,
May the day and night be always well!
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, grant this here and now!
Glorious masters, grant this here and now!
Yidam deities, grant this here and now!
Dharma protectors and guardians, grant this here and now!
Local deities, grant this here and now!
May all the spirits gathered in this place,
Be it on the earth (or in the water) or in the sky,
Always show goodwill and kindness to all beings,
And practise Dharma day and night!
The victorious buddhas, conquerors of the enemies,
Only ever utter truths and never what is false.
Through this truth, may everything be virtuous and positive here and now!
And may we all be freed from every major fear!
May everything be auspicious here and now, so that we yogins and yoginīs, and all those around us, our teachers and our patrons, be freed from all the harms of solar and lunar eclipses, and liberated from every form of destructive influence, obstacle and adversity!
jaya jaya sujaya 7