The Melody of the Auspicious Spiralled Conch A Prayer Based on the Liberation Life of the Great Emanated Tertön Chokgyur Lingpa
All-pervasive luminous dharmakāya of great bliss,
Great indestructible sphere, the essence of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa,
Primordial protector, sovereign who is present in all things,
Noble guru, at your feet I pray.
Heir to the wisdom mind of the Oḍḍiyāna Guru, the second buddha,
Universal ruler of oceanic adepts and revealers of treasure,
Guardian of the teachings and beings in this degenerate age, your liberated life beyond imagining—
Chokgyur Lingpa, at your feet I pray.
Although you discovered the nectar of perfect peace at the outset,
Still you arranged vast, ocean-like clouds of kāyas and pure realms,
And with infinite nirmāṇakāyas—in art, through rebirth and supreme—
You revealed the miraculous display of fourfold training—to you I pray.
In the Land of Snows in particular, you adopted the guise
Of the son of Lord Tri Song and attained supreme siddhi,
Then manifested as Sangye Lingpa and the rest, a hundred
Wondrous and amazing dance-like forms—to you I pray.
With pre-eminent magnanimity, you consider the beings of this degenerate age;
With pre-eminent activity, you appear according to the needs of those to be trained;
With a pre-eminent life of liberation, you hold an unprecedented secret treasury—
To you, the one who is pre-eminent in these three ways, I pray.
Intentionally, you took birth in the heart of Upper Dokham,
And even in youth transcended the realm of the ordinary,
As you awakened an affinity for the noble life of liberation—
To you who brought inspiration to those with faith, I pray.
In your thirteenth year you met the Oḍḍiyāna Guru directly.
He authorized your profound treasures and conferred his blessings.
You received attainments, including the Prince’s sādhana supports.
To you, the one who brought forth treasures of the mind, I pray.
Without sectarian bias you followed numerous authentic masters,
Primarily from the Karma, Drukpa, Drikung and Taklung Kagyü,
Delighted them in the three ways 1 and imbibed the essential nectar
Of sūtra and mantra into the glorious knot of your heart—to you I pray.
Pema Wangchen, 2 an actual manifestation of Padmasambhava,
And the glorious Pawo Tsuklak Chökyi Gyalpo 3 both
Issued symbolic prophecies and entrusted you with the ultimate lineage.
To you, the one who banished obstacles and gained accomplishment, I pray.
Through activating your master-disciple connection
With the gentle lord Khyentse Wangpo in particular,
Your minds merged as one, and you unlocked a hundred doors
Of wondrous interdependent connection—to you I pray.
To the faultless wisdom-vision you gained at birth
No dharma, provisional or definitive, was concealed,
And with the full strength of twofold wisdom, you outshone
All who considered themselves learned or accomplished—to you I pray.
At the earthly centre of enlightened speech 4 and elsewhere,
You completed the yogas of generation, perfection and Great Perfection,
Destroyed delusion and gained proficiency in the four types of activity, 5
To you, an ornament upon the crowns of adepts, I pray.
In pure visions you often travelled to the realm of Lotus Light,
Where you practised fourfold approach and accomplishment 6
Together with the three-kāya Guru and hosts of disciples,
And received empowerments and prophecies—to you I pray.
You beheld countless victors, their heirs and yidam deities,
And participated in feast gatherings together with ḍākinīs,
While oath-bound treasure guardians and virtuous protectors
Carried out whatever actions you commanded—to you I pray.
The Three Cycles of the Guru, peaceful and wrathful sādhanas,
The Union , Scripture , Illusion , Three Sections of the Great Perfection , and more—
To you, the one who revealed a vast treasury of Dharma jewels,
The likes of which had not been seen before upon this earth, I pray.
You directly encountered a hundred supremely sacred places,
With the twenty-five major sites of Dokham foremost among them.
You are the one who brought them all to light—
Great captain guiding infinite beings to liberation, to you I pray.
The great teachers of every tradition without sectarian bias,
Especially the glorious protectors of the Land of Snows,
The fathers and sons of the Karma and Drukpa and supreme holders of the Ancient Translations teachings,
All bowed down before your feet—master of masters, to you I pray.
As foretold in the vajra prophecies of the Oḍḍiyāna Guru,
Ten principal custodians of your teachings took the lead
In extending the sphere of your profound treasury activity
Throughout the whole of Ngari, Ü, Tsang and Dokham—to you I pray.
You showered down a rain of vajra blessings upon supremely sacred places,
Suppressed the eight classes of spirits and demons, and conferred magnificence.
Everywhere throughout the land you arranged outer and inner auspiciousness,
And averted the misfortune of this degenerate age—to you I pray.
You bestowed common and uncommon empowerments and instructions,
Performed grand accomplishment rites and dances, granted liberation upon taste,
And in these and other ways, you impartially benefitted countless beings.
To you who made every connection a meaningful one, I pray.
To encourage virtue among those who might cling to permanence,
And since you perceived another mission of vast significance,
You departed, together with miracles perceived by the fortunate,
For the realm of Lotus Light—to you I pray.
In the pure realm that is Wholly Covered in Lotuses,
You are the supreme son of the victorious one Rays of Lotus Light,
Who displays infinite emanations throughout the ten directions,
Including one called Lotus Essence—to you I pray.
Confer the blessings of enlightened body, speech and mind
Upon your heirs, who pray with devotion of the three doors.
Guide and care for us inseparably in all our lives to come,
And lead us to the supreme of pure realms, we pray.
Pacify all circumstances that hinder our attainment of awakening,
Cause short-term aspirations to be fulfilled according to the Dharma,
Help us to traverse with ease the four stages of the vidyādharas,
And ultimately attain the state of the Vajrasattva of Great Bliss.
May the profound treasure teachings spread throughout this world,
May the sublime masters who uphold them live for a hundred aeons,
And may the virtuous excellence of this constant, far-reaching activity
Cause the sun of auspiciousness to shine throughout the three worlds.