The Bright Lamp of Definitive Meaning A Guru Yoga Main Practice Conclusion: Dedication and Aspiration
Aḥ. My own awareness is freed from the beginning—
In this, the dharmakāya, I take refuge.
The awakening mind is beyond adoption and relinquishment—
Through recognition of my own nature, I generate bodhicitta.
Aḥ. In great empty space, the primordial purity of all phenomena,
Amidst a spontaneously present expanse of five-coloured light,
Upon a lion throne, lotus, moon and sun-disc seats,
My root guru appears as a heruka
In the costume of a yogic practitioner.
Dark red, in a mood of passionate wrath,
And holding vajra and bell.
He is in union with the ḍākinī of great bliss,
White with a tinge of red and holding knife and skull.
Their three centres are marked with the three seed-syllables,
And they abide in the great non-duality of samayasattva and jñānasattva.
Aḥ. To the guru’s display throughout the three worlds,
I bow down in the homage of the view of purity and equalness.
Whatever appears arises as an ornament of offering.
In the state of the non-arising of misdeeds and downfalls, I confess.
I rejoice in the virtue that is unfabricated.
I request the turning of the dharma wheel of great spontaneous presence.
Remain in the state beyond change and transference, I pray.
I dedicate accumulated virtue within the youthful vase body.
Supreme vidyādhara and mahāsiddha,
Vimalamitra, attainer of great transference,
Appearing in the guise of a spiritual friend—
Khyentse Wangpo, to you I pray.
Spontaneous accomplisher of the four types of activity,
With the full strength of knowledge, love and capacity,
Great accomplished hero and vidyādhara—
Yeshe Dorje, to you I pray.
oṃ āḥ guru padma-jñāna-vajra sarva siddhi hūṃ
From the three vajra seed-syllables at the three centres,
A mass of replica forms, mantra garlands and insignia,
Together with rays of light and a stream of nectar,
Stream forth like a shooting star and dissolve
Into my own three centres, successively and all at once.
Through this my obscurations are purified and I receive empowerment and siddhis.
Finally, in a state of great delight,
The guru passes through my brahma-aperture
To the pavilion of light at the core of my heart,
Where he remains inseparably, and within
The sphere of light at his own heart-centre,
Samantabhadra and Samantabhadrī, naked and unadorned,
Have in their hearts a bright, deep blue syllable āḥ
Upon which I focus awareness, as mind merges with wisdom,
And I rest in a state of realization beyond the intellect.
All sights, sounds and thought impressions of environment and inhabitants
Are seen as the play of the glorious guru.
Through this virtue, may all beings
Awaken into the guru’s essential nature.