Benedictory Verses for Pramāṇavārttika[1]
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Oṃ svasti.
This treatise is like an eye for all living beings.
Through the path of reasoning[2] it reveals
The meaning of all the Buddha’s Words and the commentaries upon them,
And it establishes the authentic purity of the Teacher too. 
This fine work, authored by the universally victorious Dharmakīrti,
Elucidates the meaning of the Compendium of Valid Cognition (Pramāṇasamuccaya),
Which Sthiracakra[3] urged Dignāga to compose. 
The brilliance of this work compels the tīrthikas
To scurry to their gloomy hovels below ground,
And establishes the great victory banner of the Sage’s teachings
At the summit of the world—such is the power of this treatise. 
Since would-be scholars must, therefore, consult this,
And, through the light of Mañjughoṣa’s blessings,
Develop intelligence in the ways of the Dharma,[4]
This dharmic gift has been produced through the miracle of printing.
May all the positivity that has thereby been acquired
Be dedicated to the expansion of the Sugata’s teachings. 
Throughout all our lives to come,[5] may we follow the authentic Teacher
And gain mastery of the fourfold knowledge.[6]
The very one who carried out this pure deed made this prayer of aspiration. May virtue and excellence reign supreme! Sarva maṅgalam. Śubhaṃ.
| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2022.

Bibliography
Tibetan Edition
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir, H.P.: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. (BDRC W1KG12986). Vol. 10: 569

Version: 1.0-20220607




The original is untitled; this title has been added by the translator.  ↩


Reading rig pa’i lam as rigs pa’i lam  ↩


i.e., Mañjuśrī. Reading bstan pa’i 'khor lo as brtan pa’i 'khor lo  ↩


This and the previous line incorporate the syllables of Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö's own name.  ↩


Reading tshe rab as tshe rabs  ↩


i.e., Precise interpretive, dharmic, linguistic and courageous knowledge.  ↩