Awesome Ones’ Assembly (Palchen Düpa), the Heart Practice of the Awareness-Holders 1. Taking Refuge 2. Generating the Mind Set Upon Awakening 7 3. Gathering the Accumulations 4. Giving the Torma to the Obstructing Forces 5. Establishing the Boundary and Protection Circle 6. Opening the Symbolic Door, Paying Homage, Confessing Mistakes and Taking the Vow 7. The Descent of Blessings on the World and Beings 8. Blessing the Offerings 9. The Very Elaborate Generation Phase that Purifies Egg-Birth 10. Empowerment 11. Invitation 12. The Request to Remain 13. Prostration 14. Offering the Mudrā of Dance 15. Offering of Wisdom Songs 16. The Regular Offerings of Sensual Delights 17. The Secret Offerings of the Fundamental Purity of the Three Poisons 18. Offering of Medicine 19. Receiving the accomplishment 20. Offering the Samaya Substance of Torma 21. Offering of Rakta 22. Offering of Ambrosia in an Uncompromisingly Secret Manner 23. Offering of Union and Liberation 24. Praise 25. Mantra Recitation 1. The Peaceful Approach Phase 2. The Wrathful Accomplishment 3. Applying the Activities The Conclusion: The Stages of the Feast-Gathering The Invitation The first portion The Intermediate Portion: Confession Lastly: The Offering of Liberation The Remainder Invoking the Sacred Pledge Proclaiming the Covenant Maintaining the Twelve Tenma Goddesses 99 Horse Dance Receiving Accomplishments Confession Dissolution Arising in the Yoga of Daily Activities Dedication and Aspiration Prayers Prayer of Auspiciousness Bibliography
Hūṃ. All the bliss-gone ones, who have the nature of the Three Jewels,
Arise as the essence of the Awesome Ones’ Assembly.
Knowing that the bodhicitta deities who perform radiating and gathering
Are my own true nature, I take refuge!
Hūṃ. The basic space of the expanse of phenomena is equanimous and free of bias.
Yet lacking realization, one wanders in confusion. To liberate this demon of self-grasping
Into the expanse of luminous dharmakāya
I practise the Awesome Deities and generate the mind set upon awakening!
Hoḥ. I prostrate to the vajra master, 8
Glorious embodiment of the buddhas of past, present and future!
With a mind free from all duality,
I take refuge in the Three Jewels, the objects of reliance!
I request that you accept these pure offerings,
Both actual and envisioned.
My faults, the hindrances that cut the flow of accomplishments, 9
I confess without exception.
In all those actions throughout the ten directions done without attachment
And free from concepts of subject, object and action, I rejoice!
I awaken the perfect mind set upon awakening,
Pure and untainted by the four extremes.
To the bliss-gone ones, 10 mighty lords and sentient beings. 11
I offer my body for the threefold purpose. 12
Gathering the merits accumulated throughout all my lives,
I dedicate them to supreme enlightenment!
Hūṃ. I am the universal Awesome One—
All you harm-doers, misleading guides and elemental spirits
Who obstruct the attainment of enlightenment:
Take this torma offering and go elsewhere!
If you dare disobey this command,
Your head will be split into fragments
And your body ground to dust!
oṃ vajra-mahā-krodha padma-krodhīśvari vajra-kīli kīlaya mahāyakṣa kālarūpa karma raṃ raṃ jvala raṃ hūṃ phaṭ
Hūṃ. I am Vajra Wrath.
My sun and moon eyes burn and blaze.
My heart emits wrathful deities like sparks.
The billionfold universe is filled with emanating fire,
And all directions are filled with a frenzy of weapons.
Within selflessness and emptiness, I set the boundary!
oṃ sūrya-candra 13 vajra-krodha jvala raṃ raṃ cakravarti mahā-krodha sarva-duṣṭān e hūṃ phaṭ
Hūṃ. The cataract of ignorance is removed with the scalpel of primordial wisdom.
I prostrate symbolically by realizing the nature of mind to be the form of the deity.
I confess transgressions, confusion and faults into the expanse of the dharmakāya.
Even at the cost of my life, I will not abandon the Awesome One.
a la la hoḥ
Hūṃ. Deities of the Awesome Ones’ Assembly:
From the expanse of the dharmakāya, arouse compassion,
And manifest in various saṃbhogakāya displays
And nirmāṇakāya maṇḍalas and deities.
Grant empowerment and blessings, and show us signs and omens! 14
oṁ rulu rulu hūṁ bhyo hūṁ phaṭ
sarva-samaya āveśāya pheṃ pheṃ
Hūṃ. From basic space the three wisdom syllables descend like rain,
Burning, scattering, and washing away any faults and impurities in the offering substances.
From bhrūṃ arises a jewelled vessel and from a arises a skull-cup
That contains oceans of outer, inner, and secret offering clouds.
oṃ vajra-arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe dīpaṃ gandhe rūpa śabda gandhe rāsa sparśa sarva-pūja āḥ hūṃ
oṃ āḥ hūṃ sarva-pañcāmṛta hūṃ hrīḥ thaḥ
oṃ āḥ hūṃ mahā balimta teja balidha bhalabhati guhya-samaya svāhā
oṃ āḥ hūṃ mahā-rakta samanta-maṇḍala hūṃ phaṭ
Hūṃ. Naturally-arisen awareness, suchness devoid of self—
Its display is all-illuminating, great compassion, whose radiance is
The causal awareness—hūṃ. It purifies the world and beings
And then transforms into a five-pronged vajra.
Instantly, it converts into the causal heruka,
Who arises in the sky of the mother—the inexpressible five expanses.
From his heart unfold 15 e, yaṃ, ra, suṃ, keṃ and raṃ.
From e comes space, from yaṃ the whirling wind.
From ra comes rakta, from suṃ the ground of human skin.
From keṃ a terraced mountain of bones.
From raṃ the magnificent expanse of blazing apocalyptic fire.
From hūṃ a massive vajra of meteoric iron, and above that,
From the expanse of the sky, a five-coloured bhrūṃ descends.
bhrūṃ ratna bhanda jñāna cakra maṇḍala bhrūṃ
The syllable bhrūṃ transforms into the emanated palace.
The outside of the palace is made of jewels, the inside of skulls.
It has four corners and four doors, and possesses all the proper qualities and characteristics.
It has a guṇa-toraṇa 16 archway with eight levels,
Dharma-wheels, deer, parasols, and a jewel top-ornament.
On the outside, the foundations of the walls are made of jewels.
On the red offering-ledges are the sixteen goddesses.
The palace is adorned with yellow bricks and latticework.
It has rain spouts and parapets, and the upper stories have vajra-ornaments.
The inside of the palace appears as a charnel ground.
On the outside it is surrounded by the eight charnel grounds and the vajra tent.
Within the expanse of blazing apocalyptic fire, roaring and flashing,
Is the magnificent palace of the Unsurpassed 17 realm ‘Display of the Great Secret’,
Utterly terrifying. In the centre of an eight-spoked wheel made of meteoric iron
Is e , the expanse of great bliss—Samantabhadrā. 18
Within it, the beasts trample the nine great haughty ones.
On a lotus of non-attachment blaze the seats of sun and moon—method and insight.
rudra krodhi tira baṃ
paṃ padma-maṇḍala
ma sūrya-maṇḍala
a candra-maṇḍala
Hūṃ. The naturally-arisen causal herukas 19
Descend from the space of primordial wisdom and are seated.
With the sound of the great bliss of union,
Offerings are made to the nobles ones and others’ benefit accomplished.
They transform into the resultant herukas,
Mahottara Mighty Skull-Garlanded Vajra— 20
Dark blue in colour, with three heads, six hands,
And four legs in champion’s stance,
Trampling on the heads of the four gyalgong demons. 21
His right face is white, stern and laughing.
His left is red and terrifying, with fangs bared,
And his central face is blue with a wrathful and majestic expression.
The supreme forms of the five families are complete on his crown.
A vajra-garuḍa soars above his head.
He has nine eyes, his tongue curls, and he bares his fangs.
His first right hand holds a vajra,
The middle a khaṭvāṅga and the last hand holds fire.
His first left hand holds a red skull-cup, 22
The middle a plough, and the last
An iron scorpion with nine heads.
All the charnel ground accoutrements are complete.
He is in union with the supreme consort Sky-Faced Lady— 23 Samantabhadrā.
Her right hand embraces him and holds a khaṭvāṅga,
Her left offers a red skull-cup of desire filled with blood.
Her body is blue and bedecked with ornaments.
Amidst a blazing expanse of apocalyptic fire,
They remain in the great bliss of the four joys.
From the point of union of the Awesome One and consort
Dark blue hūṃ syllables radiate
To the spokes in the four cardinal and four intermediate directions
And generate the herukas with their consorts and sons.
hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ
Through the resounding of the great hūṃ mantra
The maṇḍala of wrathful kings is spontaneously present.
Within the expanse blazing like apocalyptic fire,
Naturally arising, primordial wisdom appears as the gathering of wrathful ones.
In the East is Vajra-Heruka, 24 blue in colour.
His right hand holds a vajra, his left a skull-cup filled with blood.
He is in union with Vajra-Krodhiśvarī.
In the south is Mañjuśrī-Yamāntaka, yellow in colour.
His right hand holds a club, his left hand in the threatening mudrā.
His consort is the black devourer Vetālī.
In the West is mighty Hayagrīva, red in colour.
His right hand holds a sword, his left a lotus.
His consort is the wrathful queen Splendid Lotus.
In the North is Vajrakīla, green in colour.
His two hands brandish a dagger.
His awesome consort is Dīptacakrā.
In the south-east is Unsurpassable Heruka. 25
Dark blue in colour, he holds a garuḍa and corpse-mace.
His great consort is Supreme Peace and Bliss.
His retinue are the Five Mothers 26 and others.
In the south-west is Vajra-Vidyādhara, white in colour.
His right hand holds a skull-mace, his left a bell.
His consort is Vajrayoginī, enjoying great bliss.
In the north-west is Tamer of the Arrogant, blue in colour. 27
His right hand holds a hammer, his left a short spear.
His consort is Universal Tamer of the Three Realms of Existence.
In the north-east is Mighty Black One. 28
His right hand holds an iron hook, his left a snake-lasso.
His consort is Lady of the Five Elements.
She raises the form realm aloft and suppresses the desire realm.
All of them possess a retinue of the four families.
With their feet they trample upon the great male and female gods. 29
To symbolize unchanging reality, the female deities are blue.
They hold a curved knife and skull-cup, and embrace their male consorts.
On the outside are the gatekeepers of the four families.
They hold, respectively, an iron hook, lasso, iron shackles and bell.
These nine groups of maṇḍala deities,
All seven hundred and twenty-five,
Arise like rays from the sun.
The colour of their bodies, implements and ornaments are all distinct,
Yet clearly visualized as the great completeness.
Hūṃ. The gathering of Awesome Ones arises from oneself.
In order to perfect power and strength,
Bless my ordinary body, speech and mind into the enlightened body, speech and mind,
And grant the empowerment of the five primordial wisdoms.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
oṃ hūṃ svā hrīḥ āḥ
In my head, on a moon, is oṃ.
In my throat, on a lotus, is āḥ
In my heart, on a sun, is hūṃ. From them radiate rays of light,
Inviting all the thus-gone ones,
Who dissolve into the three syllables.
These completely transform
Into the deities that are awakened in twenty aspects within the essence of the vajra-like primordial wisdom of the enlightened body, speech, and mind of all the buddhas. 30
On my crown is Vairocana, white in colour and holding a wheel.
In my throat is Amitābha, red in colour and holding a lotus.
In my heart is Akṣobhya, blue in colour and holding a vajra. By sealing the three places in this way, the qualities of the ground, path and fruition are completely perfected.
oṃ sarva-tathāgata mahā-kāya vajra-svabhāv-ātma-ko ‘haṃ
oṃ sarva-tathāgata mahā-vāka vajra-svabhāv-ātma-ko ‘haṃ
oṃ sarva-tathāgata mahā-citta vajra-svabhāv-ātma-ko ‘haṃ
oṃ mahā-śūnyatājñāna vajra-svabhāv-ātmako ‘ham
oṃ mahādarśa-jñāna vajra-svabhāv-ātma-ko ‘ham
oṃ mahā-samatā-jñāna vajra-svabhāv-ātma-ko ‘ham
oṃ mahā-pratya-vekṣanā-jñāna vajra-svabhāv-ātma-ko ‘ham
oṃ mahā-kṛtyānuṣṭhāna-jñāna vajra-svabhāv-ātma-ko ‘ham
At the five points on the crown are the male and female empowerment deities in union; as their passion increases, the bliss of melting unfolds as a river of bodhicitta, which grants the empowerments,
Purifies the stains of the five emotions,
And transforms the five aggregates into the five buddha families. In this way the imputed nature is sealed by the dependent nature.
The remaining water overflows from the crown, and in this way
The dependent nature is sealed by the truly existent nature. As a sign of unchanging, primordial wisdom, the crown of the head is marked with a half-vajra
And crowned by Amitābha, the lord of the families.
Through the great display of light in your heart, the sky is filled with all the thus-gone ones of the ten directions, the wheel of the maṇḍala—vajra-samāja!
Hūṃ. From the Unsurpassed, the space of reality, the pure realm of great bliss,
Arises the spontaneously present display, the dance of the nine expanses of wisdom. 31
Infinite peaceful and wrathful deities, Eight Awesome Herukas— 32
In order to tame the wicked, please come to this place!
ehy ehi jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
samaya hrīṃ hrīṃ jaḥ jaḥ
Hūṃ. Impure appearances arise as the infinite purity of
The wheel of the palace and the deities. 33
In the supreme realm of joy emanated from samādhi,
May the indivisible nature of the samaya and wisdom deities remain firmly!
samayāveśaya tiṣṭha lhan
Hūṃ. In the self-existent, naturally arisen, emanated maṇḍala,
Dualistic thoughts of good and bad are utterly pure.
Yet still, within the dharmakāya of natural awareness, I display the symbolic homage,
And free from adopting and abandoning, I prostrate!
atipu hoḥ
nama yadhiḥ
Hūṃ. Captivating, heroic and terrifying are the demeanours of your body.
Menacing laughter, stern and ferocious are the demeanours of your speech.
Compassionate, awesome and peaceful are the demeanours of your mind
Please enjoy the offering of the naturally arising nine demeanours!
mahā-mudrā pūja hoḥ
Hūṃ. The vajra song of the sixteen joys,
In union with the song of wisdom,
Arise from oneself and are offered to oneself.
Show us in actuality non-conceptual, primordial wisdom!
mahā-jñāna te te hūṃ | tena te te hūṃ
Hūṃ. The five regular offerings and all sensual delights
Arise as ornaments of the five sense faculties.
With this great mudrā of offering,
Gathering of Awesome Deities, may you be pleased!
oṃ śrī-vajra-saparivāra dhūpe hūṃ | puṣpe trāṃ | āloke hrīḥ | gandhe hoḥ | naivedye āḥ | śabda hūṃ | sarvapūjā samaya hoḥ
Hūṃ. Even the great blood of desire, the bones of anger,
And the flesh of ignorance—the three poisons—
Are primordially the three great kāyas.
They arise from themselves and are liberated in their own place!
hala pañca-pūja hoḥ
Vajra-samaya, O great wonder!
The demon of eight major and thousand minor ingredients
And the elixir which destroys the suffering of the six causes 35
Are the five Buddha families and five primordial wisdoms. 36
oṃ āḥ hūṃ sarva-pañcāmṛta hūṃ hrīḥ ṭhaḥ
Basic space and awareness, male and female deity, appearance and emptiness—Heruka,
Vajradharma, Ḍākinī Karmendrāṇī,
Maṇḍala of gurus of the Awareness-Holder Assembly—
To you I offer this ambrosia medicine which liberates upon taste!
sarva-pañcāmṛta kharaṃ khāhi
Mañjuśrī-Vajra Trisong Detsen,
Eight accomplished adepts 37 with your pure retinue of destined disciples,
Lord of mind treasures endowed with the seven lineages— 38
To you I offer this ambrosia medicine which liberates upon taste!
sarva-pañcāmṛta kharaṃ khāhi
Held in his 39 compassionate care, custodian of his Dharma mind treasures,
Nirmāṇakāya manifestation of Prince Murub Tsenpo, 40
Dodrupchen Jigme Trinle Özer Palbar—
To you I offer this ambrosia medicine which liberates upon taste!
sarva-pañcāmṛta kharaṃ khāhi
His heir, Chökyi Lodrö, 41
Gyalsé Shenpen Tayé Ö—Vairocana incarnate—,
And the one prophesied by Padmasambhava: unsurpassable Dorjé Tsal, 42
To you I offer this ambrosia medicine which liberates upon taste!
sarva-pañcāmṛta kharaṃ khāhi
Supremely accomplished thirteenth incarnation of the king, 43
You, Dongak Lingpa, possess the wondrous authoritative transmissions.
Embodiment of all lineages and traditions, root guru—
To you I offer this ambrosia medicine which liberates upon taste!
sarva-pañcāmṛta kharaṃ khāhi
To the deities of the heruka maṇḍalas in whom the nine wisdoms are perfected,
Attendants of the Awesome One, classes of arrogant worldly spirits,
Seven hundred and twenty-five deities, beyond the imagination and spontaneously present—
To you I offer this ambrosia medicine which liberates upon taste!
sarva-pañcāmṛta kharaṃ khāhi
In the middle of the kapāla 44
Are the enlightened body, speech and mind of all the buddhas
In the form of the three syllables.
Respectfully receive it with the samaya-mudrā! 45
kāya-siddhi oṃ
vāka-siddhi āḥ
citta-siddhi hūṃ
Hūṃ. In the torma vessel of the vast bhaga,
The liṅga torma of sensual delights blazes.
The samaya substances of vajra food—
A la la! Enjoy them with delight!
mahā-baliṅte khāhi
Hūṃ. In a great skull with scalp and hair
Is the blood of desire and anger liberated in basic space.
To purify saṃsāra in its own place,
Without adopting or rejecting, please accept it!
mahā-rakta khāhi
Hūṃ. The male and female deity, the two causes, 46
Are joined through the condition of the four mudrās. 47
The five poisons are transformed into medicine—
This jagad, the deathless drink of heroes, I offer! 48
mahā-vajrāmṛta-jagad pūja hoḥ
Hūṃ. I strongly invoke the vajra to enter into
The city of the lotus and join in union.
All the deities are delighted and
Unite suffering with great bliss 49
And liberate thoughts in the space of selflessness.
jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ | tana-gana pūja hoḥ
Hūṃ! Your form of an ugly rākṣasa is captivating and heroic,
Your vajra laughter is menacing and you make ferocious and stern sounds,
Your supremely peaceful mind is compassionate and awesome;
With your nine demeanours you suppress the three realms—you I praise!
Your vajra and blood-filled skull unite desire and anger with basic space.
Your khaṭvāṅga 50 and plough destroy the wild, uncultivated three poisons.
Your flame and iron scorpion slay thoughts and gyalgong spirits.
To you who are beyond concepts and the tamer of arrogant ones, I prostrate!
Since the dharmakāya is unmoving, your body is blue.
Your heads symbolize the three kāyas and your hands the six perfections.
Your legs have the nature of the four immeasurables.
To your body, which is complete with all the marks and qualities, I pay homage!
Reality is singular, yet its radiance is the nine expanses of wisdom. 51
According to the capacity of students, you appear joyful, desirous or angry.
Your form is a magical display that blazes unbearably—
To the seven hundred and twenty-five deities of the maṇḍala, I pay homage!
I am Mahottara in union with the consort.
In my excellent heart, amidst an expanse of latticed light,
Upon a sun and moon—the union of clarity and emptiness—
Is Samantabhadra in union with his consort.
He sits in cross-legged vajra posture in meditative equipoise.
At his heart is the life-force of all the bliss-gone ones—
The three syllables, assembled one above the other, clearly visualised.
They radiate light, and I consider that all of appearance and existence
Awakens as the five primordial wisdoms.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
In the heart of the wisdom king and queen in union, 55
Upon a lotus, sun and moon,
Is a golden vajra with nine prongs.
In the central prong is the concentration-being 56 hūṃ.
In the eight prongs, beginning with the front, are
The first, the six cities, and the last. 57
All of them are turned toward the hūṃ in the centre,
Extremely subtle and blazing with light rays.
oṃ guru-śrī-vajra-yakṣa-krodha-citta hūṃ
From the seed syllables of the mantra,
A string of mantra-garlands emanates.
It exits the male deity and enters the mouth of the female deity.
It flows through the form of her body 58 and from her secret space,
Entering the path of the vajra-jewel.
It dissolves into the life-force hūṃ at the heart and revolves.
The light rays of great bliss
Make offerings to the victorious ones and gather all the jewel-like accomplishments,
Which then dissolve into me.
Once again light radiates, purifying the karma and emotions of beings.
All of them are brought to the supreme level
Of the Awesome Heruka. 59
hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ
The whole assembly of deities resounds with the all-embodying mantra, 60
With a roaring and rumbling sound.
Five-coloured light fills the three thousand-fold cosmos, through which
Diseases and evil spirits are pacified, lifespan and glory increase,
The three realms are magnetized, and beings liberated.
Consider that you attain the four levels of an awareness-holder.
oṁ vajra-caṇḍa-sarva-ḍuṣtāntaka hana daha paca hūṁ phaṭ 61
Instantly, a vajra of meteoric iron appears.
It has nine prongs, and in the blazing interior of the hub,
Within an expanse as vast as the three thousand-fold cosmos,
Are the nine Awesome Ones. Through their fury, the fierce mantra resounds.
In the upper part near the eight tips of the life-force axis
Are the lords of saints 69 in the guise of demon tamers,
Surrounded by a fourfold retinue.
In the prongs are the eight accomplished awareness-holders,
With hat, great gown, and threatening mudrā.
They cast spells of sages and wear the accoutrements of activity.
With the sounds jaḥ, bhyoh, and phaṭ,
They all exert themselves in the activities of summoning, liberating, and transferring.
The lower nine tips pierce the nine gongpo demons
Through their hearts, reaching all the way down to the mighty base.
In the openings of the central handle’s eight-spoked wheel
Soars an emanated iron scorpion.
Razors turning anti-clockwise
Slice harm-doers, enemies, and harmful influences into pieces.
The scorpion eats
Misleading forces, enemies, spirits,
Especially the ranks of the Nine Gongpo Brothers,
Just like flames consuming tinder.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-yakṣa-krodha sarva-ḍuṣtān hana hana hūṁ phaṭ
Hūṃ. From the heart of Awesome One radiate raṃ, yaṃ, and khaṃ,
Purifying grasping at the feast-offerings as real.
Within the kapāla of the great bliss of appearance and existence,
The essences become the samaya substances of the five families.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ ha ho hrīḥ
Hūṃ. From the Unsurpassed, the palace of basic space,
The saṃbhogakāya endowed with the seven branches
And the pure realm of the nature-nirmāṇakāya, 72
We invite the host of deities of the Awesome One’s maṇḍala.
In the places and secondary places,
The lands of play and secondary lands of play,
The fields and secondary fields,
The meeting places and secondary meeting places,
The chandoha and upacchandoha—
The ten sacred places of the Herukas; 73
The great Cool Grove charnel ground, and
In Uḍḍiyāna, Lotus Mound,
In Zahor, Cuckoo Expanse,
In Siṃha, 74 Perfected in Body,
In Kashmir, Display of Great Bliss,
In Nepal, Yamakha,
In Tukhara, 75 Display of the Great Secret,
And in Khotan, Perfected World—
The eight great charnel grounds—
All who reside there—heroes 76 and ḍākinīs,
Energetic Spirits, 77 yogis, and protectors of the realms—
I invite you to this feast-gathering, please come!
This assembly hall is an emanated, pure abode.
The feast substances are an adornment of sensual delights.
The brothers and sisters—method and insight—
And their vajra songs and dances are magnificent,
Their small skull-drums 78 rattling, their bells ringing.
This is the place of supreme samaya!
There are no quarrels, disputes, or clamour.
With the experience of knowledgeable yogic conduct,
Enact this samaya!
Grant us the supreme and ordinary accomplishments!
guru-deva-ḍākinī-dharmapāla-samaya jaḥ
Hūṃ. The samaya of the buddhas is unsurpassed.
The five meats and the five ambrosias
Are the outer feast of food and drink.
The five goddesses of sensual delights
Are the inner feast of the enjoyment of the senses,
Unsurpassed, primordial wisdom of bliss and emptiness
Is the secret feast of the play of the four joys.
All of this I offer to the deities of the maṇḍala!
Having accepted it, grant us empowerment and accomplishments!
gaṇacakra-pūja hoḥ
Hūṃ. Ever since I became confused,
And as long as I possess this body of karmic ripening,
I have committed and will commit the ten negative actions, the five inexpiable crimes, the five similar to inexpiable crimes,
The sixteen severe mistakes, the eight wrongs, and so on—
Without concealing anything
I confess all impairments of the three vows of the three vehicles
And the samayas of the awareness-holders,
On the basis of this gaṇacakra feast-offering.
Grant me the accomplishment of great utter purity!
oṃ herukasatvasamayam anupālaya herukasatva tvenopatiṣṭha ḍṛḍho me bhava sutoṣyo me bhava supoṣyo me bhava anurakto me bhava sarvasiddhiṃ me prayaccha sarvakarmasu ca me cittaṃ śreyaḥ kuru hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ bhagavan sarvatathāgataheruka mā me muñca heruka bhava mahāsamayasattva āḥ
From e arises the inescapable prison-pit of existence.
The enemy of the view of self, bound through confusion and ignorance,
And the obstacle makers of dualistic grasping, who obscure the space of primordial wisdom,
Are held by the hook of awareness—primordial wisdom of great purity—,
Bound by the lasso which never wavers from meditative equipoise,
Caught by the net woven from the threads of clear seeing, 79
And intoxicated by the bell of faultless post-meditation.
All clinging to the five aggregates
Is cut through by the weapon of the realization of selflessness!
I offer it to the gathering of unborn wrathful deities
māṃsa rakta citta gorocanā vasutāḥ keṃ nirti 80 tana cakra pūja kha kha khāhi khāhi
oṃ akāro mukhaṃ sarva-dharmānām ādyanutpannatvāt oṃ āḥ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
Kyeḥ! First, offer the best portion
To the maṇḍala of Awesome Ones, the lords of the feast.
Second, do the confession,
Since for yogis the samaya is severe.
Finally, offer the liberation,
Because the continuum of self has been liberated through realization.
Now, offer the remainder—
Hosts of Mothers, 84 lords, kiṃkaras, and laṅkas,
The three hundred and sixty messengers, and others—
Even you all are emanations of the Awesome One.
The remainder must be sprinkled with spit
In order to mix the samaya as one. 85
The Lord must suppress his subjects
In order to exhort them to perform what has been entrusted.
The subjects must revolt against their lord
So that he may employ the swift skillful means of wrathful activity. 86
Hūṃ. From the natural peace of utter purity,
The victorious Awesome Lord emanates.
From the play of method and insight, the secret moon, 87
Arise the protectors of the maṇḍala’s perimeter.
All of you who previously made an oath:
In your hands you hold up lungs, hearts, and intestines,
And roam the assembly hall, judging good and bad,
With limitless strength and magical powers.
In the past, when the Awesome Heruka
Liberated the rudra of the three poisons,
Your made a promise and oath—remember that!
On the great feeding pathway of the rākṣasīs, 88
Accept the leftovers and protect the teachings!
Carry out the activity entrusted to you!
Hūṃ. From the palace of the dharmakāya of non-abiding, primordial wisdom,
Arise the peaceful and wrathful deities of the saṃbhogakāya—
I invoke your sacred pledge! Think of the benefit of beings!
Although the nature of awareness is the buddha nature,
Based on the indeterminate all-ground clinging to ignorant perception,
The objects of the five senses and dependent arising,
Beings wander among the six classes and five types of beings.
Tormented by the power of their karma and emotions,
They experience suffering that has ripened as outer objects:
Disease, war, famine, enemies, obstacles, the harmful influence of elemental spirits,
The eight great fears and the sixteen fears—
All these are annihilated through the display of your violent, wrathful action.
Beings who cling to entities because of wrong views
Are difficult to tame by the other vehicles of cause and effect.
Carry out your enlightened activity that induces realization of naturally arising, primordial wisdom!
Hūṃ! During the eternal excellence beyond the three times,
In the Unsurpassed—the sacred and fully-perfected primordial wisdom—
The teacher of the purity of the all-ground, mind, and its object,
Teaches his retinue—who are his own perception and lack inherent existence—
The three yogas of the mind-direct transmission of the buddhas,
Beyond signs, words, and expressions.
At that time, the twelve renowned teachers of clarity, 89
The hero Garab, the keeper of secrets Vajradharma,
And the supremely accomplished awareness-holders of the sign transmission
Received the empowerment where the teacher and the retinue are in wisdom mind one.
Accept this torma of the naturally liberated eight consciousnesses!
Perform the enlightened activity that purifies confusion into the ground!
Later, when the teachings of secret mantra arose,
In the Unsurpassed, the Joyous Realm, 90 and on the peak of Mount Meru—
The sacred places renowned as the Three Divine Realms,
As well as in Shambala, Uḍḍiyāna, and Zahor,
In Siṃhala on the peak of the Blazing Meteoritic Mountain, 91
And at the great stūpa Blissful Mound,
When all the scriptural collections of the awareness-holders were taught,
You, ḍākinīs of this world and beyond
And all the protectors of the maṇḍala’s perimeter,
Took the torma and promised to judge good and bad.
Now, in accordance with your vow, carry out your activities!
Later, when the time had arrived to benefit beings,
The eight great accomplished awareness-holders
Such as Nāgārjuna-garbha and Skull-Garlanded Lotus 92
Spread the teachings far and wide in this world.
In particular, when in the Red Cave of glorious Chimphu
The vidyādhara master Padmasambhava
Opened the sādhana class maṇḍala of the Eight Herukas
To the divine King Trisong Detsen,
And when, on the Lion’s Display 93 at Khepuri peak, 94
All you yakṣas were bound under oath,
You gave your life-force and agreed to the covenant.
Accept this offering torma and carry out your activities!
Later, in Nepal, the display of his seven consciousnesses,
Near the Jarung Kashor Stūpa, 95 his own perception,
‘Naturally Arisen Vajra’, Jigme Lingpa,
Was given, by the ḍākinī of basic space, the signs of the space treasury—
Magically created yellow scrolls endowed with the five primordial wisdoms.
There it was written that when, in the Red Rock Cave of Drégu Tsekpa, 96
Samantabhadra Drimé Özer 97
Released the seals of secrecy and gave the transmissions and entrustments,
You, the Mother with one eye and boiling blood
And the sage with a crow above his head, 98
Gave your promise—in accordance with this, carry out your activities!
Bhyoḥ. As the Ladies of the assembly and keepers of the sacred words,
You are Vajra Herukas’ sky-consorts.
As the local deities of the snowy mountains of Tibet,
You are the four demonesses, four yakṣiṇīs, and four menmo— 100
Come! Come and accept this torma.
You purify the twelve interdependent links
And the twelve zodiac signs, while at the same time you are their natural purity.
On the border of Nepal and Tibet, Tseringma;
In Latö, 101 Dorjé Yamakyong;
On mount Nöjin, Kunzangmo;
Drokchen Khordul, chief of obstacle makers;
On the snowy Mount Everest, Chenchikma;
In the North, Khading Lumo Gyal;
On Mount Kharak, Dorjé Khyung Tsünma;
On Machen Pomra, Drakmo Gyal;
Kongtsün Demo, protectress of the realm of Tibet;
In Drok Tsen, Dorje Menchikma;
Jomo Nakgyal Yarmo Si;
In Central Tibet, Dorje Zulemen;
All of you are attendants of Padmasambhava:
Abide by your samayas and aid your family.
According to your oath, take this torma
And protect us from armies at the borders and the turmoil of the Gyadre.
Protect us from the pitfalls of heretics
And the pestilence of the nine Gongpo brothers.
Avert the view of personality that confuses permanence and nihilism as liberation,
And dissolve it in the Middle. 102
Carry our your activity of spreading the teachings
Of the twelve aspects of the Truths. 103
oṃ la la | le le | taṃ taṃ | te te kharagma | ma ma singdroma hūṃ bhyoḥ hūṃ hūṃ
Hūṃ. You evil ones, si spirits who cause us to break our samaya—
Fleeing the yogic discipline of the mind set on awakening,
You attack the minds of all beings.
I suppress you! I suppress you beneath the weight of the great thousand-fold universe!
I bind you! I bind you to the neck of a sea monster.
I banish you! I banish you into the mouth of Death.
I burn you! I burn you with the fire of wisdom!
Until the view of self is eradicated,
Even if this aeon is destroyed, you won’t be released!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ sthabhaya lam nan
Hūṃ. Guru, source of all blessings,
To grant us accomplishment you manifest as the display of the Awesome Deities.
From the maṇḍala of awakened mind—the three doors of liberation—
The actual bodhicitta, the truly existent nature:
Grant me the supreme accomplishment of Mahāmudrā:
The ten grounds and five paths; the ten empowerments, outer and inner;
The four awareness-holder levels; the five kāyas and five wisdoms;
The eight accomplishments, and the four enlightened activities.
Saṃsāra’s nature is the two adventitious stains
That lie dormant in the all-ground consciousness—
Purify them! Grant us right here, right now,
The sacred accomplishment, supreme in every way!
oṃ guru śrī vajrayakṣa krodha citta hūṃ
dharmakāya | saṃbhogakāya | nirmākāya citta siddhi phala hūṃ
Hoḥ. All the accomplishments of the Mantra Vehicle
Depend on the samayas.
Yet, overpowered by confusion,
Ignorance and destructive emotions,
We have numerous flaws and are rife with faults.
Compassionate guardians:
Although you are without anger,
Since you are the judges of good and bad, 104 your harsh retribution will be brought down
If you see a mere mistake.
I openly acknowledge and confess
All my transgressions and mistakes. Grant me purification!
Hūṃ. The pure forms of the world and inhabitants
Are the appearances of the palace and deities,
The support and supported—
All dissolve into the main deities. They dissolve into hūṃ.
From the shabkyu 105 up to the nāda,
Everything dissolves in stages into the original nature—āḥ.
Once again, in post-meditation, awareness-bodhicitta
Arises as the Heruka of the fundamental nature.
In the form of the single mudrā, his three places
Are marked by syllables, giving protection from conceptuality.
vajra-rakṣa hūṃ
Hūṃ. With appearance, sound and awareness merging in the state of the three maṇḍalas 106
The practice of merit and wisdom of the two phases is perfected. 107
I dedicate it to the nirvāṇa of non-abiding wisdom—
May everyone attain the level of the Awesome One!
Hūṃ. In this pure realm of the primordial protector and the five families, Immense Ocean, 108
The emanated realm of the spontaneously present five kāyas,
The thousand buddhas of this fortunate aeon have come.
For this fortunate aeon of light, may all be auspicious!
In the vajrayāna pure realm of this three-thousand-fold universe,
The teachings of the sky-farers originated in Uḍḍiyāna
And were brought to the snowy mountains of Tibet by the kindness of King Trisong;
For his teachings to spread far and wide, may all be auspicious!
At the centre of this world of Jambudvīpa is the vajra-seat.
In the Snowy Land of Tibet are the Three Dharma Centres 109
Where the Dharma-kings and paṇḍitas convened.
For the teachings of the Victorious One to remain for long, may all be auspicious!