The Flute of Faith
In Praise of Drikung Kyobpa Rinpoche
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Homage to the Guru Mañjughoṣa! 
Boundless Lord, victor of the Blissful Realm,
Nāgārjuna, pioneer of Dharma in Jambudvīpa,
And the great bodhisattva Mañjughoṣa
Became the emanated king, noble Tri Songdetsen,
Who was then reborn in the family of Kyura
As Drikungpa, protector of the Land of Snows,
Renowned by the epistle-like name of Rinchen Pal,
A diligent upholder of vows, unstained by any fault.
Even the Malaya forest could only partially convey
His perfume of ethical discipline, delightful to āryas,
Emanating and pervading as far as a league away.
To all, including the devas, he was delightful to behold.
In a single collection, one hundred and fifty texts of vajra speech,
He established the unique intention, the ultimate definitive meaning,
Of what the omniscient victor, the great sun-like Lord of Sages taught
In successive turnings adapted to disciples’ characters and capacities.
These works establishing how all teachings are beyond contradiction
Are the heart of the teachings, an adornment to beautify the Mahāyāna.[1] 
Even a great arhat from Sri Lanka commanded
That a white lotus be offered to his crown.
And accordingly, Śākyaśrībhadra presented
The flower as a gift and plucked the vīṇā of praise.
When such sublime and saintly beings exalted him,
Is it any wonder that fools should also offer praise? 
Heart-son of the sugata Deshek Gyalpo,[2]
Forefather of an ocean of Kagyü siddhas,
Miraculously he founded great centres of Dharma,
So that the whole earth became filled with the saffron-clad.
He created threefold representations beyond the ken of immature minds.
And travelled to the Blissful Realm—to this one I offer praise. 
When this glorious and incomparable lord of Dharma
Appeared somewhat clearly in his bright, sky-like mind,
The old gander Lodrö paid tribute with melodious song:
May we receive the blessings of the Dharma sovereign! 
Through the circumstance of a larger-than-life bronze image of Kyobpa Rinpoche appearing[3] to my mind, I supplicated with great faith. Siddhirastu!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2023.

Bibliography
Tibetan Editions
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "'bri gung skyob pa rin po cher bstod pa" in gsung 'bum/_'jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros/ (dbu med/). (BDRC W21813). 8 vols. Gangtok: Dzongsar Khyentse Labrang, 1981–1985. Vol. 1: 185–186
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "'bri gung skyob pa rin po cher bstod pa/" In 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir, H.P.: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. (BDRC W1KG12986). Vol. 2: 721–722

Version: 1.0-20230206




In these lines Jamyang Khyentse alludes to the titles of two of Jikten Sumgön’s most famous works The Single Intention (dgongs gcig) and Heart of the Mahāyāna Teachings (theg chen bstan pa’i snying po).  ↩


i.e., Pakmodrupa Deshek Gyalpo (1110–1170) was a disciple of Gampopa and important early patriarch of the Kagyü school.  ↩


Following the dbu med edition which has 'char; the 12-volume edition mistakenly reads 'tshar.  ↩