The Essence of Cintāmaṇi A Daily Practice of the Great Compassionate One, Wish-fulfilling Wheel I. The Preliminaries II. The Main Part III. The Conclusion
namo guru mahā-kāruṇika-cintā-maṇi-cakrāya 1
Namo. To the Compassionate One, essence of the Three Jewels,
And to the Guru, I go for refuge.
In order to dredge saṃsāra from its depths
I will swiftly accomplish Wish-fulfilling Wheel!
To the victorious ones, their heirs, and retinue,
I pay homage, make offerings, and confess misdeeds.
In all virtue I rejoice. I request that they turn the wheel of Dharma
And that they long remain. All goodness I dedicate to sentient beings.
May we all reach full awakening!
The field of accumulation dissolves into me.
oṃ śūnyatā-jñāna-vajra-svabhāvātmako ‘haṃ
From within the state of primordial great emptiness,
Illusory compassion, the dynamic display of awareness,
Manifests as the moon-like syllable hrīḥ .
Light streams from hrīḥ and a palace appears,
Like a woven lattice of rainbows. At its centre,
Upon a seat of lotus, sun, and moon disc,
The syllable hrīḥ transforms into Avalokiteśvara,
Wish-fulfilling Wheel, with a white body,
Three faces, eight hands, and a smile.
His right face is dark blue, his left is red, and he has nine eyes.
His first pair of hands are raised in the dharmadhātu-mudrā
While holding a five-pronged vajra.
The pair below are holding a jewel and vase,
The pair below that a lotus stem and khaṭvāṅga,
And the last pair a hook and lasso.
He stands, adorned with silks and jewels,
In a glowing expanse of rainbow light rays,
Amid an ocean of buddhas and bodhisattvas.
He is samaya and wisdom indivisibly united.
At his heart centre, upon a lotus and moon disc,
Is hrīḥ encircled by the mantra garland.
Light radiates outward, makes offerings to the noble ones and invokes their blessings,
Purifies beings’ obscurations and fulfils their every wish, their every need.
Gathering back, the light rays dissolve into me
And thus I attain the supreme and common siddhis.
oṃ padma-cintā-maṇi-jvala hūṃ phat
Through this virtue, may I swiftly accomplish
The state of Wish-fulfilling Wheel,
And establish all wandering beings,
Without a single exception, at that very level.
You are unstained by exertion and effort,
Yet, like a wish-fulfilling jewel and a wish-fulfilling tree
You fulfill the wishes and hopes of beings.
May there be the auspiciousness of all wishes being fulfilled!