Natural Liberation of Suffering The Great Compassionate One: The Secret Practice from the Heart-Essence of the Vast Expanse 1. Preliminaries 1.Taking Refuge 2. Arousing Bodhicitta 3. Seven-Branch Offering 4. Offering the Torma to Obstructing Forces 5. The Protection Circle 6. Descent of Blessings 7. Blessing the Offering Substances 2. The Main Section 1. Generating the Palace and the Deity 2. Invitation 3. Requesting the Deities to Take Their Places 4. Prostration 5. Offerings 6. Special Offerings 7. Offering Praise 8. Mantra Recitation Particular Practices Long-life Practice For Overcoming Obstacles and Increasing Merit For Magnetizing the Entire Three Realms For Filling the Treasury with Wealth
Namo lokeśvarāya! 1
Namo. In this never-ending cycle of saṃsāra, by nature only suffering,
All sentient beings, just like me, wander helpless.
So, with intense longing in my heart, I take refuge
In you, the deity of Sublime Compassion, essence of the Three Jewels!
Hoḥ. The six kinds of living beings—my very own parents and objects of my compassion,
All fail to recognize their own nature, and then act out of delusion.
So that I can place them, with a boundless compassion, on the path to enlightenment,
I arouse the supreme bodhicitta mind, relative—in aspiration and action—and absolute.
Hoḥ. Before all sources of refuge, past, present and future,
With devotion I prostrate and make offerings, both outer and inner.
Openly I acknowledge and confess all unwholesome and harmful actions,
Rejoice in all that is meritorious, urge you to turn the wheel of Dharma,
And implore you to remain here. I dedicate all the roots of goodness to enlightenment—
May all beings attain the realization of the Sublime Lord of Compassion!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Hrīḥ. I take on the form of ‘The Mighty Lotus’—Hayagrīva,
Great subjugator of all who lead us astray.
All you obstructors and misleading forces, hear this:
Accept this torma offering made of sensual delights,
And begone—to the far shore of the great ocean!
Dare to disobey my command,
And you will be annihilated—crushed beneath the vajra hammer.
Therefore, do not disobey!
Hrīḥ. The whole universe becomes the vajra tent,
Where beings and environment are the three maṇḍalas.
For all those demons and obstructing forces of delusion and habit,
I set the boundary, unwavering from the three kāyas.
vajra rakṣa rakṣa jvala hūṃ phaṭ
Hūṃ. From the basic space of emptiness, the radiance of compassion’s play
Arises unceasingly, like clouds gathering in the sky.
All the relative substances with characteristics are blessed
And transform into the great maṇḍala of original purity.
oṃ jñāna-vajrābhiṣaya peṃ peṃ sarva-samāja jaḥ
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ. All these offerings, outer, inner, and secret
Appear as sacred items, yet in their true nature
Are vast wisdom nectar, possessing the splendour of a hundred tastes,
And so they become the most exquisite offering, that delights the deities of the maṇḍala.
oṃ vajra-arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda
sarva-pañca rakta baliṅta mahā-sukha pūjā āḥ hūṃ
Hrīḥ. Where all things and events are beyond concept, free of any ground or origin,
The union of space and awareness arises as a realm of infinite purity:
My entire perception, spontaneously perfect, is the Potala Mountain
A maṇḍala with symbols, signs, and characteristics all perfect. And in its centre
Lies a multi-coloured, thousand-petalled lotus, and sun and moon seats, on which
From hrīḥ, I arise as the Sublime One, deity of compassion,
In the form of Lord Avalokiteśvara ‘Natural Liberation of Suffering’,
With one face and four hands and standing in a posture of equanimity,
The palms of my two main hands joined at my heart,
And the other two holding a mālā and white lotus.
I am in saṃbhogakāya form, beautiful with silks and jewels.
My complexion is white tinged with red, and I am wearing bone ornaments,
Resplendent with the nine peaceful expressions and thirteen ornaments,
Above my head sits Amitābha, lord of the enlightened family.
In the four directions, and each on a four-petalled lotus, are:
Arya Tārā, her body white in colour, in the east,
Mārīcī, yellow in colour, in the south
Kurukullā, ruby red in colour, in the west
And Vasudhārā green in colour, in the north,
Each one wearing their own full set of ornaments and garments.
At the four doors are the four Mighty Ones, in colours matching their particular activity,
All of them striding, majestic, terrifying, and gripping hooked knives and skull-cups.
Clad in wrathful ornaments, they stand imposingly amid a mass of flames.
Between them all, buddhas, bodhisattvas and vidyādharas,
Heroes, 3 ḍākinīs and samaya-bound Dharma protectors gather like clouds.
Appearing yet empty, the deities are all vivid and distinct.
Their three centres are marked with the three seed syllables,
From which light streams out to the luminous, supreme abodes,
And especially to that nirmāṇakāya pure land, Mount Potala,
The twenty-four sacred places and the eight charnel grounds,
Inviting the wisdom deities. Vajra-samājaḥ!
Hrīḥ. From the Mighty Palace of Great Bliss in the West,
Lord Amitābha, come now, I pray!
From the emanated pure realm of Mount Potala,
Lord Avalokiteśvara, tamer of beings, come now, I pray!
From the palace of training beings though compassion,
Deities of the maṇḍala, all of you, come now, I pray!
Grant me, the practitioner, your blessings!
Grant me siddhis, common and supreme!
oṃ lokeśvara-guru-deva-ḍākinī-sarva-samaya jaḥ jaḥ
Hrīḥ. For you deities in this naturally liberating maṇḍala of compassion, beyond any reference point,
There is no coming, arriving, or remaining.
Even so, to cleanse the fleeting stains of dualistic grasping,
Remain here, steadfast, samaya-being and wisdom-being inseparably one.
vajra-samaya tiṣṭha hoḥ
Hrīḥ. To you, accomplished conqueror, Great Compassionate One, and all your deities
Symbolically I prostrate, free from delusion and recognizing our oneness.
As if I were an emanation of the ‘Great Gods who Enjoy their own Emanations’, 4
Free of acceptance or rejection, I bow!
namo puruṣāya hoḥ
Hrīḥ. Like Samantabhadra’s display of offering clouds,
I offer flowers, incense, lights and scented water,
Food, and music—the ﬁve sensual delights—
And the riches of gods and humans, all in their entirety: Accept them, please!
oṃ vajra-arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda | rūpa śabda gandha rāsa sparśa mahā sarva pūja khāhi
Hrīḥ. The exceptionally wondrous materials of great bliss—
Amṛta, torma, rakta, and feast-offerings—radiant with joy,
The wisdom consort, and the genuine nature that transcends the mind—
All these I offer. Accept them, please, and grant me empowerment and siddhis!
sarva-pañca rakta baliṅta mahā-sukha dharmadhātu pūjā hoḥ
Hrīḥ. In the palace of dharmadhātu beyond conceptual thought,
Lord of the saṃbhogakāya of spontaneously perfection,
Avalokiteśvara, great treasure of boundless compassion,
In your form as Natural Liberation of Suffering―to you I offer praise and homage!
With the four immeasurables, you guide all beings on the path to liberation,
The dance of your compassion taming each according to their needs.
You possess the power to miraculously shift into forms of any kind.
Ladies of the four families—to you I offer praise and homage!
With your mastery of all four enlightened activities
And your display of wrathful fury that subdues misleading forces,
Hayagrīvas of the four families, manifesting without any hindrance at all:
Along with the entire maṇḍala of deities―to you I offer praise and homage!
I am the Great Compassionate One. In my heart
In the centre of a vast casket of sun and moon conjoined,
Upon a moon disc stands the white life-force syllable hrīḥ,
Encircled by the seven syllables of the mantra.
Light radiates out to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas,
Especially the Great Compassionate One, and invokes their wisdom minds.
Light streams out to all six classes of beings, purifying their karma and destructive emotions.
The rays return and dissolve into me,
Through which I obtain siddhis, common and supreme.
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ
From the Sublime One’s heart light streams out,
Invoking the wisdom mind of Arya Tārā.
The vital essence of the elements, animate and inanimate,
Life-spirit and life-force—whatever has been dissipated—is summoned back
And dissolves into the beneficiary of the practice, who is visualized
In the heart of the main deity, extending their life.
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ | tāre ayur-jñāna tshe bhrūṃ nṛ ja svāhā
From the Sublime One’s heart light streams out,
Invoking the wisdom mind of Mārīcī.
The lustre, radiance, and vitality of misleading spirits
Is drawn in, like water through a pipe, and dissolves into me,
Granting me the majestic brilliance of the sun and moon.
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ | ārya-mārīcyai māṃ svāhā
From the Sublime One’s heart light streams out,
Invoking the wisdom mind of Kurukullā.
All the pure vital essence of the animate and inanimate world,
And in particular the life, merit, and power of the objects of our focus,
Is gathered completely in the form of red light,
And dissolves into me, causing me to shine in dazzling brilliance.
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ | kurukulle hrīṃ hrīṃ vaśaṃ kuruye svāhā
From the Sublime One’s heart light streams out,
Invoking the wisdom mind of Vasudhārā.
All the wealth of gods, nāgas, ṛṣis, and human beings
Is summoned with light-rays in the form of hooks
And bestowed upon me.
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ | mama vasudhāri svāhā