An Authentic Liturgy for Daily Practice of the Treasure Text of Transference: Enlightenment Without Meditation from The Heart-Essence of the Vast Expanse 'Inserting the Grass-stalk’ Prayer 3 Sky Dharma Transference Prayer 4
My own body is Vajrayoginī,
With one face and two hands, brilliant red and holding hooked knife and skull,
My two feet gracefully poised, my three eyes gazing into the sky.
“In the middle of her body runs the central channel
As thick as a hollow reed arrow,
Empty and clear like a tube of light.
Its upper end is open at the brahma-aperture,
And its lower end extends below the navel centre.
Upon the knot at the heart-centre,
In the centre of a light green sphere of inner air 1
Awareness clearly appears as a red syllable Hrīḥ .
A forearm’s length above the crown of one’s head
Appears the Buddha Amitābha, ‘Limitless Light’, 2
Complete with all the major and minor marks.”
Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, stainless and immaculately pure protector Amitābha, to you I pay homage!
To you I make offerings! In you I take refuge!
Emaho!
In the self-appearing realm, the ultimate Akaniṣṭha,
Is an expanse that teems with rainbow light of intense devotion.
Here, the embodiment of all objects of refuge, one’s own root guru,
Not in ordinary form but with a body of light,
Abides as the essence of glorious Buddha Amitābha.
With intense devotion, we pray:
Inspire us to accomplish the path of transference!
Inspire us to reach the realm of Akaniṣṭha!
May we capture the domain of dharmakāya expanse!
Buddha Amitābha, I prostrate to you;
Padmasambhava of Uḍḍiyāna, I pray to you;
Kind root teacher, hold me with your compassion!
Root and lineage gurus, guide me along the path.
Inspire me to master the profound path of transference.
Inspire me to take this short path of transference to a celestial realm.
Inspire me and others, so that as soon as this life is over,
We may take rebirth in the realm of Sukhāvatī!
Emaho! Most wondrous protector Amitābha,
Great Compassionate One and Vajrapāṇi-Mahāsthāmaprāpta,
For myself and others I pray to you one-pointedly:
Inspire us to master the profound path of transference.
When it comes time for us to die,
Inspire us with your blessings, so that our consciousness may be transferred to the realm of Great Bliss!
Hik!
In Sukhāvatī, you are known as the bodhisattva Lodrö Nyingpo,
In the Snowy Lands of Tibet, as the amazing Dharma Lord Kaḥ Dampa Deshek, 5
Renowned as the protector Amitāyus.
To you and all the other root and lineage gurus, I pray:
Bless me so that I may take rebirth in the realm of Sukhāvatī!
Hik!
oṃ guru āyusiddhi hūṃ | oṃ amaraṇi jīvantaye svāhā
oṃ namo bhagavate aparimitāyur-jñāna-suviniścita-tejo-rājāya tathāgatāya arhate samyak saṃbuddhāya | tadyathā | oṃ puṇye puṇye mahā-puṇye 'parimita-puṇye 'parimita-puṇya-jñāna-saṃbhāropacite | oṃ sarva-saṃskāra-pariśuddhe dharmate gagana-samudgate svabhāva-viśuddhe mahā-naya-parivāre svāhā |