The Refined Essence of Compassion A Daily Sādhana for the Natural Liberation of Suffering, the Secret Practice of the Great Compassionate One Lineage Prayer Taking Refuge and Arousing Bodhicitta Confession of Mistakes Dissolution Dedication and Aspiration Verses of Auspiciousness
Namo lokeśvarāya!
The blessing of the wisdom mind of Padma Heruka
Passed from Indradevī and Nāgārjuna,
Down to Padmākara:
Masters of the lineage of wisdom speech,
Of the past, present and future―to you I pray!
To the Lotus-born Guru of Uḍḍiyāna, I pray!
Namo. In this never-ending cycle of saṃsāra, by nature only suffering,
All sentient beings, just like me, wander helpless.
So, with intense longing in my heart, I take refuge
In you, the deity of Sublime Compassion, essence of the Three Jewels!
Hoḥ. The six kinds of living beings—my very own parents and objects of my compassion,
All fail to recognize their own nature, and then act out of delusion.
So that I can place them, with a boundless compassion, on the path to enlightenment,
I arouse the supreme bodhicitta mind, relative—in aspiration and action—and absolute.
Hrīḥ. Where all things and events are beyond concept, free of any ground or origin,
The union of space and awareness arises as a realm of infinite purity:
My entire perception, spontaneously perfect, is the Potala Mountain
A maṇḍala with symbols, signs, and characteristics all perfect. And in its centre
Lies a multi-coloured, thousand-petalled lotus, and sun and moon seats, on which
From hrīḥ, I arise as the Sublime One, deity of compassion,
In the form of Lord Avalokiteśvara ‘Natural Liberation of Suffering’,
With one face and four hands and standing in a posture of equanimity,
The palms of my two main hands joined at my heart,
And the other two holding a mālā and white lotus.
I am in saṃbhogakāya form, beautiful with silks and jewels.
Above my head sits Amitābha, lord of the enlightened family.
In the four directions, and each on a four-petalled lotus, are:
Arya Tārā, her body white in colour, in the east,
Mārīcī, yellow in colour, in the south
Kurukullā, ruby red in colour, in the west
And Vasudhārā green in colour, in the north,
Each one wearing their own full set of ornaments and garments.
At the four doors are the four Mighty Ones, in colours matching their particular activity,
All of them striding, majestic, terrifying, and gripping hooked knives and skull-cups.
Clad in wrathful ornaments, they stand imposingly amid a mass of flames.
Between them all, buddhas, bodhisattvas and vidyādharas,
Heroes, 3 ḍākinīs and samaya-bound Dharma protectors gather like clouds.
Appearing yet empty, the deities are all vivid and distinct.
Their three centres are marked with the three seed syllables,
From which light streams out to the luminous, supreme abodes,
And especially to that nirmāṇakāya pure land, Mount Potala,
The twenty-four sacred places and the eight charnel grounds,
Inviting the wisdom deities. Vajra-samājaḥ!
oṃ lokeśvara-guru-deva-ḍākinī-sarva-samaya jaḥ jaḥ
vajra-samaya tiṣṭha hoḥ
namo puruṣāya hoḥ
oṃ vajra-arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda rūpa śabda gandha rāsa sparśa mahā sarva pūja khāhi
sarva-pañca rakta baliṅta mahā-sukha dharmadhātu pūjā hoḥ
Hrīḥ. In the palace of dharmadhātu beyond conceptual thought,
Lord of the saṃbhogakāya of spontaneously perfection,
Avalokiteśvara, great treasure of boundless compassion,
In your form as Natural Liberation of Suffering―to you I offer praise and homage!
I am the Great Compassionate One. In my heart
In the centre of a vast casket of sun and moon conjoined,
Upon a moon disc stands the white life-force syllable hrīḥ,
Encircled by the seven syllables of the mantra.
Light radiates out to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas,
Especially the Great Compassionate One, and invokes their wisdom minds.
Light streams out to all six classes of beings, purifying their karma and destructive emotions.
The rays return and dissolve into me,
Through which I obtain siddhis, common and supreme.
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ
[oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ] tāre ayur-jñāna tshe bhrūṃ nṛ ja svāhā
[oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ] ārya-mārīcyai māṃ svāhā
[oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ] kurukulle hrīṃ hrīṃ vaśaṃ kuruye svāhā
[oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ] mama vasudhāri svāhā
Hūṃ. In this maṇḍala of the Great Compassionate One,
If my offerings were incomplete, my practice inattentive,
Or my meditation drowsy, dull or lifeless—
Please forgive all such error and confusion.
oṃ vajrasattva samayam anupālaya vajrasattva-tvenopa-tiṣṭha dṛḍho me bhava sutoṣyo me bhava supoṣyo me bhava anurakto me bhava sarva-siddhiṃ me prayaccha sarva-karma śuca me cittaṃ śreyaṅ-kuru hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ bhagavān sarva-tathāgata-vajra mā me muñca vajrī-bhava mahā-samaya-sattva āḥ
Hoḥ. Just like bubbles form and vanish on a stream,
The deities of the self-emanated maṇḍala
Dissolve back into the space of primordial wisdom—vajra muḥ!
In post-meditation, everything arises as the illusion-like form of the deity.
Hoḥ. All sources of virtue accumulated in the three times,
I dedicate as the cause for realizing primordial omniscience.
May I and all those assembled here
Attain enlightenment together, in a single maṇḍala!
Hoḥ. Through the blessing of the lineage of vidyādharas,
The truth of the Three Jewels—Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha,
And the interdependent circumstances of profound Secret Mantra,
May all be auspicious, to pacify the eight fears! 4
May all be auspicious, for increasing longevity and merit!
May all be auspicious, to bring perception under our control !
May all be auspicious, to annihilate negative, misleading forces!
With all attachment to perception perfected as the form of the deity,
All sound purified into the great bliss of mantra,
All thoughts matured into the clear light of dharmakāya,
May all be auspicious, so that we attain the translucent rainbow body!