Prayer and Call from Afar to the Great Omniscient One
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö 
Embodiment of all sources of refuge, root guru, care for me! 
Magical embodiment of all the buddhas' wisdom,
Merely to think of you banishes the anxieties of existence and peace.
Omniscient Drimé Özer, care for me.
Look upon me with compassion here and now. 
The three seats are complete in the maṇḍala of your form,
The sound and emptiness of your speech has the sixty qualities of Brahma's voice,
And the essence of clear light is profound peace, free of complexity.
Longchen Rabjam, indivisible from the three kāyas,
Look upon me without departing unmanifest space. 
As an adornment to the great bliss chakra at my crown
And in the pavilion of light within the centre of my heart,
May you always remain inseparably,
Granting blessings, empowerment and attainment. 
With the brilliant light of your knowledge and love,
Eliminate from its very source
The darkness that dwells within my heart. 
Cause me to realize directly and without error
The systems of the outer and inner sciences,
Especially the profound nature of reality itself,
Unleash the power of the wisdom of awareness,
And deliver the great treasure of courageous eloquence. 
As I exert myself day and night with river-like continuity
On the path of the four visions of clear light,
May objective appearances fade away
In the expanse of dharmatā, and for the rest of existence
May I have the supreme vajra form of the rainbow body
And bring about immeasurable benefit for others' sake. 
Enclosed within clear light, the youthful body in a vase,
Inwardly luminous wisdom is indwelling yet not dull
And outwardly radiant wisdom presents an infinite array
Of buddha forms, wisdoms and purelands.
May the boundless activity of liberating beings
Unfold permanently, pervasively and spontaneously. 
Throughout this and all my future lives,
May you, the omniscient, perfectly awakened one,
Remain as the lord of my buddha family without ever parting,
And may you confer the vajra wisdom upon me. 
Care for me! Care for me! O guru, care for me! 
| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2020.

Bibliography
Tibetan Edition
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "kun mkhyen chen por gsol 'debs rgyang 'bod/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 8: 529–530