Praise of Longchen Rabjam[1]
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Oṃ svasti.
Omniscient lord, who expounded in this northern land
The secret treasury of the sublime Victorious One,
Lord of Sages unrivalled throughout the three worlds
The all-knowing one, supreme among human beings. 
The epithet 'all-knowing' may permeate like camphor
And be widely heard, but in reality,
Drimé Özer, you are a second Victorious One,
Like glorious Meru amidst a range of golden mountains. 
You mastered the ocean of the Sage’s excellent words,
Skilfully distinguished the tenets of Outsiders and Insiders,
And became a true sun of the entire teachings, Longchenpa,
No one is there throughout this world who compares to you. 
You have always been awakened but assumed a human guise,
Incomparable pioneer of the supreme vehicle’s teachings,
The lord of secrets, warrior-like Garab Dorje in person,
Drimé Özer, 'immaculate radiance' of the wisdom sun. 
Your speech, like the sweetest nectar from a lotus,
Perfectly invigorates those of superior intelligence.
And at the close of the five-hundred-year period many whose minds
Are supremely knowledgeable arose through the force of your fine explanations. 
As most scholars hastened onto tortuous paths,
You set a straight course by means of the two truths.
Not confusing or misrepresenting the books of tenets,
You are the unique eye bringing joy to all who know. 
With the light of the vajra jewel of luminosity
Set as the ultimate pinnacle of all vehicles,
You dispel the darkness of delusion throughout the three worlds—
Ever-perfect primordial guru and protector, to you I bow. 
From now on, throughout the course of all my lives to come,
May I behold your face and receive the blessings of your three secrets.
May I gain the realization of the victor and his heirs,
And may all beings reach the sublime level of omniscience! 
This prayer was offered on the twentieth day of the twelfth month in the Water Snake year.[2] Siddhir bhavantu!
| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2022.

Bibliography
Tibetan Edition
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. “Sa gsum 'di na/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir, H.P.: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. (W1KG12986) Vol. 2: 557–558

Version: 1.0-20220513




The original is untitled; this title has been added by the translator.  ↩


24 January 1954, two days after the anniversary of Longchenpa, which is celebrated on the eighteenth day of the twelfth month.  ↩