Vast Clouds of Blessings
In Praise of the Omniscient Lord of Dharma
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Foremost among those with supreme, unchanging accomplishment,
You fully awakened into inner radiance[1]
A lord of the maṇḍala with pristine wisdom form—
Ngakgi Wangpo, 'Lord of Speech', to you I pay homage. 
You discovered the wisdom of omniscience,
Spontaneously accomplishing the twofold aim, sovereign of Dharma,
Protector for all those in the three worlds without a refuge—
Drimé Özer, 'Stainless Light', to you I pay homage. 
Oceanic treasury of knowledge, love and power,
Single embodiment of the three buddha families,
The mere thought of whom banishes the fears of existence and quiescence—
Tsultrim Lodrö, 'Ethical Intelligence’, to you I pay homage. 
Within the vast primordial expanse of Samantabhadra
The splendour of sambhogakāya enjoyment is spontaneously present,
And the inconceivable nirmāṇakāya tames in appropriate ways—
Dorje Ziji, 'Adamantine Brilliance', to you I pay homage. 
With all the various perceptions of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa
Naturally freed within the central channel of luminosity,
You are the supreme crown jewel amidst oceanic scholars and adepts—
Omniscient Lord of Dharma, to you I pay homage. 
Your qualities, which defy the imagination,
Are difficult for immature minds to fathom.
Yet, through even this partial account,
May the guru’s blessings infuse us. 
In the expanse of five-coloured light within our hearts,
May you remain forever, delightedly and never parting,
And there ignite the four lamps of twofold knowledge,
The expression of aware and empty dharmatā realization. 
May the darkness of ignorance and conceptualization be dispelled,
And may we awaken within the vast expanse of the realization
Of the supreme vidyādhara guru,
Lord of Speech, knower of all that can be known. 
May the lives of those who uphold the teachings be secure,
May any obstacles to the practice of the Dharma
Or its propagation throughout the world be dispelled,
And may the teachings of the definitive secret flourish. 
May the study and practice of the Victor’s teachings in general
And the Ancient Translations in particular spread throughout every direction,
And may the tradition of the Vajra Pinnacle of Luminosity
Blaze as brightly as the sun! 
Thus, Jamyang Lodrö Gyatso, alias Rigdzin Kunzang Ösal Nyingpo Tsal, offered this prayer in the Omniscient Guru’s cave at Gangri Tökar. Siddhirastu!
| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2022.

Bibliography
Tibetan Edition
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. “Kun mkhyen chos rjer bstod pa byin brlab sprin chen/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir, H.P.: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. (W1KG12986) Vol. 2: 555–556

Version: 1.0-20220512




Reading gsol as gsal  ↩