The Noble Dhāraṇī of The Supreme Accomplishment of Sitātapatrā Born from the Tathāgata’s Uṣṇīṣa, the Great Invincible Dispeller
In the language of India: Ārya-tathāgatoṣṇīṣa-sitātapatrāparājita-mahā-pratyaṅgirāparama-siddhā-nāma-dhāraṇī
In the language of Tibet: Pakpa deshyin shekpé tsuktor né jungwé duk karpo chen shyen gyi mitubpa chirdokpa chenmo chok tu drubpa shyejawé zung (‘phags pa de bzhin gshegs pa’i gtsug tor nas byung ba’i gdugs dkar po can gzhan gyi mi thub pa phyir zlog pa chen po mchog tu grub pa zhes bya ba’i gzungs)
In the English language: The Noble Incantation “The Supreme Accomplishment of the White Umbrella Goddess Born from the Uṣṇīṣa of the Thus-Gone One, the Great Invincible Dispeller”
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas and the noble śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas!
Homage to the Blessed Invincible Uṣṇīṣa Queen! 1
Thus I have heard: At one time the Blessed One was dwelling in the Excellent Dharma Assembly Hall 2 in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, together with a great assembly of monks, a great assembly of bodhisattvas, and Indra, the lord of the gods. As soon as the Blessed One sat down upon a seat arranged for him, he entered the samādhi called, “Seeing the Uṣṇīṣa in its True Aspect.” As soon as he entered this samādhi, the words of this  mantra formula took birth from the center of the Blessed One’s uṣṇīṣa:
Homage to the Buddha.
Homage to the Dharma.
Homage to the Saṅgha.
Homage to the seventy million complete and perfect buddhas.
Homage to the saṅgha of bodhisattvas and the saṅgha of śrāvakas.
Homage to Maitreya and all the bodhisattva mahāsattvas.
Homage to the arhats in this world.
Homage to the stream-enterers.
Homage to the once-returners.
Homage to the never-returners.
Homage to those who have reached perfection in this world.
Homage to those who have set out towards perfection.
Homage to the divine ṛṣis who have the power to curse others.
Homage to the ṛṣis who have become vidyādharas with the power to benefit others.
Homage to the accomplished holders of vidyā-mantras.
Homage to Brahma.
Homage to Indra.
Homage to the blessed 3 Rudra along with Umāpati.
Homage to the blessed Nārāyaṇa worshipped by the five great mudrās. 4
Homage to the blessed Mahākāla who is believed to reside in the charnel ground, destroyer of the Tripura cities, 5 worshipped by hordes of mātṛs. 6
Homage to the Blessed One of the tathāgata family.
Homage to the Blessed One of the lotus family.
Homage to the Blessed One of the vajra family.
Homage to the Blessed One of the jewel family.
Homage to the Blessed One of the elephant family.
Homage to the Blessed One of the youthful family.
Homage to the Blessed One of the nāga family.
Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the complete and perfect Buddha Dṛḍha-śūraraṇa-sena-praharaṇa-rāja. 7
Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the complete and perfect Buddha Amitābha.
Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the complete and perfect Buddha Akṣobhya.
Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the complete and perfect Buddha, the Master of Medicine, the King with the Radiance of Lapis Lazuli. 8
Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the complete and perfect Buddha King Śāla Trees in Full Bloom. 9
Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the complete and perfect Buddha Śākyamuni.
Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the complete and perfect Buddha King Marked by Jewels. 10
Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the complete and perfect Buddha Samantabhadra.
Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the complete and perfect Buddha Vairocana.
Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the complete and perfect Buddha King Marked by the Scent of Blossoming Kamala and Utpala Flowers. 11
Having payed homage to these tathāgatas, I will proclaim the vidyā-mantra of Sitātapatrā Born from the Blessed Tathāgata’s Uṣṇīṣa, Great Invincible Dispeller. This goddess annihilates all evil bhūtas; breaks all opposing spells; averts all forms of untimely death; frees from all that slays or binds beings; averts all malice, nightmares, and bad omens; dispels evil influences of yakṣas and rākṣasas; destroys the 84,000 types of grahas; 12 renders the twenty-eight lunar mansions favourable; subdues the evil influences of the eight great planets; 13 repels all enemies; destroys all fierce acts, hostilities and nightmares; repels poisons, weapons, fire, and water; and liberates from the fearful lower realms. She is renowned as: 14
The Undefeated, the Greatly Terrible,
The Greatly Fierce, the Greatly Powerful,
The Greatly Blazing, the One of Great Energy,
The One with the Blazing Garland, the White-Clothed One,
Noble Tārā, She of Knitted Brow,
The Victorious One with the Vajra Garland,
Lotus Radiance, the One with the Vajra Sign,
The Undefeated, Garland,
The Vajra-Beaked, the Vast One,
The Peaceful One Worshipped by the Prince of Videha,
The Peaceful One with a Golden Mālā,
The Great White One, the Flaming One, the White-Clothed One,
Noble Tārā, the Greatly Powerful,
The One with the Vajra Shackles, the Other,
The Vajra Maiden, the Scion,
The One with Vajra in Hand, the One with a Golden Garland,
The One with a Saffron-Jewel,
The Illuminator, and the One Renowned as Vajroṣṇīṣa—
All of you mudrā and mantra deities, 15 please protect us, our family and friends, and all sentient beings!
oṃ sarva-tathāgatoṣṇīṣa-sitātapatre hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | jambhana-karī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ |stambhana-karī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | mohana-karī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | sambhakṣaṇa-karī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | bandhana-karī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | paraviṣa-bhakṣa-karī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | sarva-duṣṭa-pra-duṣṭān stambhana-karī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ |  sarva-yakṣa-rākṣasa-grahāṇāṃ vidhvaṃsana-karī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | sarva-para-vidyācchedana-karī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | catur-aśītināṃ graha-sahasrāṇāṃ vidhvaṃsana-karī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | aṣṭā-viṃśatīnāṃ nakṣatrāṇāṃ prasādana-karī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | aṣṭānāṃ mahā-grahāṇāṃ vidhvaṃsana-karī hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ | rakṣa rakṣa māṃ sarva-sattvāṃś ca |
Blessed Sitātapatrā Born from Tathāgata’s Uṣṇīṣa, Vajroṣṇīṣā, Great Dispeller, great goddess with a thousand arms, great goddess with a thousand heads, great goddess with a trillion 16 eyes and indestructible blazing characteristics, Great Exalted Vajra Goddess, 17 bring about well being for us and all sentient beings within the maṇḍala of the three planes of existence! 18
Gaping Jeweled Vajra, 19
She whose Eyes Have a Golden Radiance,
Vajra-Beaked, the White One,
Lotus-Eyes, the One with the Radiance of the Moon,
Awakened Eyes, the Lacquered One,
Vajrā, the One with Golden Radiance,
The Moon, and the Vajra Holder—
Please, all of you vidyā, mudrā, and secret mantra deities, completely protect us and all sentient beings!
oṃ ṛṣi-gaṇa-praśaste sarva-tathāgatoṣṇīṣa-sitātapatre hūṃ drūṃ | jambhana-karī hūṃ drūṃ | stambhana-karī hūṃ drūṃ | para-vidyā-stambhana-karī hūṃ drūṃ | sarva-sarvaduṣṭānāṃ stambhana-karī hūṃ drūṃ | sarva-yakṣa-rākṣasa-grahāṇāṃ vidhvaṃsana-karī hūṃ drūṃ | catur-aśitīnāṃ graha-sahasrāṇāṃ vidhvaṃsana-karī hūṃ drūṃ | aṣṭā-viṃśatīnāṃ nakṣatrāṇāṃ prasādana-karī hūṃ drūṃ | aṣṭānāṃ mahā-grahāṇāṃ vidhvaṃsana-karī hūṃ drūṃ | hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ rakṣa rakṣa māṃ svāhā |
Blessed Sitātapatrā Born from the Uṣṇīṣa of the Tathāgata, Vajroṣṇīṣā, Great Dispeller, great goddess with a thousand arms, great goddess with a thousand heads, great goddess with a trillion eyes and indestructible blazing characteristics, Great Exalted Vajra Goddess, ruler of the maṇḍala of the three planes of existence, please protect us all!
May my and all beings’ welfare prevail over the dangers of rulers, thieves, fire, water, poison, weaponry, opposing armies, famines, adversaries, storms, untimely death, earthquakes, meteors, royal punishment, gods, nāgas, lightning, garuḍas and ferocious beasts.
May my and all beings’ welfare prevail over all evil influences from devas, nāgas, asuras, maruts, garuḍas, gandharvas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, pretas, piśācas, bhūtas, kumbhāṇḍas, pūtanas, kaṭapūtanas, skandas, apasmāras, unmādas, chāyās, ostārakas, ḍākinīs, revatīs, yāmakas, śakunis, mātṛnandīs, samikās and kaṇṭakamālinīs!
Protect us against evil spirits who feed upon vitality and fetuses; drink blood and feed on fat, flesh, grease, marrow and newborns; steal life force and feed on vomit, feces and urine; drink from cesspools; devour leftovers; drink saliva; consume snot, mucus, filth, oblations, flower garlands, perfumes and incense; prey on people’s minds; and who consume flowers, fruits, grains, and burnt offerings!
I cut and pin down the spells of all evil beings! 20
I cut and pin down the spells of wandering mendicants!
I cut and pin down the spells of ḍākas and ḍākinīs!
I cut and pin down the spells of Brahma!
I cut and pin down the spells of Maheśvara! 21
I cut and pin down the spells of Nārāyaṇa!
I cut and pin down the spells cast simultaneously by Garuḍa! 22
I cut and pin down the spells of Mahākāla!
I cut and pin down the spells of the hordes of mātṛs!
I cut and pin down the spells of kāpālikas!
I cut and pin down the spells of Jayakara, Madhukara, and Sarvārthasiddhikara!
I cut and pin down the spells of the Four Bhaginīs!
I cut and pin down the spells of Bhṛṅgiriṭi, Nandikeśvara, and Gaṇapati
I cut and pin down the spells of naked ascetics!
I cut and pin down the spells of shaven-headed ascetics!
I cut and pin down the spells of arhats!
I cut and pin down the spells of vītarāgas! 23
I cut and pin down the spells of Lokeśvara and his retinue!
I cut and pin down the spells of Vajrapāṇi and his retinue!
I cut and pin down the spells of dūtas, dūtīs, ceṭas, and ceṭīs!
I cut and pin down the spells of all the assemblies of sages!
I cut and pin down the spells of the hosts of gods!
I cut and pin down the spells of the lords of those who desire harm!
Homage to Blessed Sitātapatrā Born from the Tathāgata’s Uṣṇīṣa, worshipped by all the buddhas and bodhisattvas! Protect us—protect us, please!
oṃ asitānalārka-prabhā-sphuṭa-vikāsitātapatre | oṃ jvala jvala khāda khāda hana hana dara dara vidara vidara cchinda cchinda bhinda bhinda bandha bandha hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā |
he he phaṭ | ho ho phaṭ | amoghāya phaṭ | apratihatāya phaṭ | varadāya phaṭ | varapradāya phaṭ | pratyaṅgiritāya phaṭ | asuravidrāyaṇakarāya phaṭ |  paravidrāpaṇakarāya phaṭ |  sarvadevebhyaḥ phaṭ |  sarvanāgebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvayakṣebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvarākṣasebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvabhūtebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvapretebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvapiśācebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvakumbhāṇḍebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvapūtanebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvakaṭapūtanebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-skandebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvonmādebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva cchāyebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvāpasmārebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvostārakebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-ḍākinībhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-revatībhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-yāmakebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-śakunibhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-mātṛ-gaṇebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-kambukāminībhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvālaṃbakebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-kaṭapūtanebhyaḥ phaṭ  | sarva-gaṇḍebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-gandharvebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarvāsurebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-kinnarebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-garuḍebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-mahoragebhyaḥ phaṭ |  sarva-durlikhitebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva duḥprekṣitebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-jvarebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-bhayebhyaḥ phaṭ |  sarvopadravebhyaḥ phaṭ |  sarvopasargebhyaḥ phaṭ |  sarva-kṛtya-karmaṇekākhordebhyaḥ phaṭ | kiraṇa-vaitāḍebhyaḥ phaṭ | cicha-preṣaka-sarva-duścharditebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-durmuktebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-tīrthakebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-śramaṇebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-pātakebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-vidyādharebhyaḥ phaṭ |  jayakara-madhukara-siddhikara-sarvārthasādhakebhyo vidyācāryebhyaḥ phaṭ | caturbhyo bhaginībhyaḥ phaṭ | vajra-kaumārīye kulaṃdhare vidyācaryebhyaḥ phaṭ | sarva-mahāpratyaṅgirebhyaḥ phaṭ | vajra-śaṃkalāya-pratyaṅgirarājāya phaṭ | mahākālāya-mātṛ-gaṇa-namas-kṛtīye phaṭ |  brahmāyaṇīye phaṭ | viṣṇāvīye phaṭ | maheśvarīye phaṭ | raudrīye phaṭ | mahākālīye phaṭ | cāmuṇḍīye phaṭ | kaumārīye phaṭ | vārāhīye phaṭ | indrāye phaṭ | agniye phaṭ | yamāye phaṭ | niritīye phaṭ | varuṇāye phaṭ | mārutīye phaṭ | somaye phaṭ | īṣānīye phaṭ | kālādarīye phaṭ | kālārātriye phaṭ | yamadāḍhīye phaṭ | yamarātrīye phaṭ | kapālīye phaṭ | adhimukti-śmaśānavāsinīye phaṭ | oṃ stoṃ bandha bandha rakṣa rakṣa māṃ svāhā |
Impart a loving mindset to all those who are harmful and aim to do us harm, who are dangerous or harbor dangerous intentions, who are evil or harbor evil intentions, who are angry or harbor angry intentions, who are aggressive or harbor aggressive intentions! Protect us and all beings!
Make us live a hundred years!
Let us see a hundred autumns!
Protect us from yakṣas and those who steal radiance, vitality, and fetuses; who drink blood; feed on fat, flesh, grease, marrow and newborns; who steal life; feed on leftovers, oblations, flower garlands, perfumes and incense; who devour flowers, fruits, grains, and burnt offerings; feed on pus and feces; drink urine and saliva; consume vomit, snot, mucus, and filth; drink from cesspools; and from beings who harbor evil, harmful, dangerous, angry, or aggressive intentions. Protect us from all evil influences from devas, nāgas, asuras, yakṣas, rākṣasas, bhūtas, pretas, piśācas, kumbhāṇḍas, pūtanas, kaṭapūtanas, skandas, unmādas, chāyās, apasmāras, ostārakas, ḍākinīs, revatīs, yāmakas, śakunis, mātṛnandīs, samikās, ālambhanas and kaṇṭakamālinīs!
Make us live a hundred years!
Let us see a hundred autumns!
Dispel all infectious diseases, whether they last a day, two days, three days, four days, or seven days; whether they are chronic or intolerable, whether they are caused by spirits, arise from disturbances in the wind, bile, phlegm, or from their combination; and all illnesses of the brain!
Dispel hemiplegia, loss of appetite, illnesses of the eyes, nose, mouth, throat, or heart, pain in the larynx, ears, teeth, heart, joints, ribs, back, stomach, waist, urinary tract, thigh, calf, hands, feet, and all the major and minor parts of the body!
Sitātapatrā, Vajroṣṇīṣā, Great Dispeller, disperse everything for miles around 24 such as bhūtas, vetālas, ḍākinīs, yakṣas, rākṣasas, infectious diseases, fluid-filled and ulcerative skin lesions, smallpox and other pustule-forming diseases, genital and perineal fistulas, leprosy, dermatophytosis and other radiating ringed papuled skin rashes, grey cutaneous scaling conditions, burn-like ulcers, cutaneous inflammation, muscle inflammation, emaciation, anxiety, productive cough, labored breathing, memory loss, metal poisoning, poisoning by compound toxins, sorcery, fire, water, epidemics, māras, imprisonment, adveseries, banishment, untimely death, insects, 25 , horseflies, 26 scorpions, snakes, mongooses, lions, tigers, bears, hyenas, feral yaks, sea-monsters, 27 and other creatures.
I suppress their spells!
I suppress their energy!
I suppress all other spells!
I suppress all bonds!
tadyathā | oṃ anale anale | khasame khasame | vīre vīre | saumye saumye | śānte śānte | dānte dānte | viṣade viṣade | vaire vaire | devi vajradhari |  bandha bandhani | vajrapāṇi phaṭ | oṃ hūṃ drūṃ hrīḥ ṣṭoṃ phaṭ svāhā | oṃ vajrapāṇi bandha bandha vajrapāśena sarva-duṣṭa-vighnān-vinyāyakān hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā ||
Whoever writes this Queen of Spells, Sitātapatrā Born from the Uṣṇīṣa of All Thus-gone Ones, Great Invincible Dispeller, on birch bark, cloth, or tree bark and wears it on their body or around their neck, or reads it, that person will not be harmed by toxins, weapons, fire, water, metal poisoning, poison, or sorcery for as long as they live. They will never meet an untimely death. They will become dear to all grahas, obstructors, and false guides. The eighty-four billion vidyā-goddesses of the vajra family will always guard, protect, and defend them. They will become dear to these goddesses. They will recall their rebirths of the past eighty-four thousand great eons. The sixty-four dūtī goddesses will always completely defend them. They will never take birth as yakṣas, rākṣasas, pretas, piśācas, pūtanas, or kaṭapūtanas. They will never be poor. They will gain heaps of merit equal to the blessed buddhas who are innumerable like the grains of sand in the river Ganges. The blessed buddhas and bodhisattvas, innumerable as the grains of sand in the river Ganges, will always guard, protect, and defend them. They will become the children of the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Whoever bears this Queen of Vidyā-mantras, Great Dispeller of Invincible Might, called ‘Sitātapatrā Born from the Uṣṇīṣa of All Tathāgatas,’ will become chaste, even if they not celibate. Those who are not ascetics will be ascetics. Though impure, they will become pure. Though they neglect fasting, they will start to observe the fast. Even for those who they have committed the five crimes with immediate retribution, their crimes will be purified. All their obscurations resulting from their past actions will be exhausted without exception.
If my noble sons or daughters wish to have children and bear or recite this Queen of Vidyā-mantras, Sitātapatrā Born from the Uṣṇīṣa of All Tathāgatas, Great  Dispeller, they will produce an heir. Furthermore, their lifespan, merit, and strength will increase. After they have passed away, they will take birth in the blissful realm of Sukhāvatī.
Whoever is threatened by diseases that affect humans or animals, by epidemics, violence, harm, infectious diseases, any kind of quarrels, and any approaching rival armies, should affix this Queen of Vidyā-mantras, the Great Dispeller of Invincible Might called ‘Sitātapatrā Born from the Uṣṇīṣa of All Tathāgatas,’ to the top of victory banners. Once extensive worship has been performed with great offerings, the banners should be hoisted at all gateways to the city, or temple, or village, or town, or province, or capital, or charnel ground, or mountain or monastery. As soon as the rituals for this noble Queen of Spells, Great Invincible Dispeller, have been completed and the banner hoisted, war will be pacified. All epidemics, violence, harm, infectious diseases, quarrels, and approaching rival armies will be completely quelled.
tadyathā | oṃ ṣṭom bandha bandha mama rāḳsa rāḳsa svāhā || oṃ ṣṭoṃ bandha bandha vajra mama rāḳsa rāḳsa vajrapāṇi hūṃ phaṭ svāhā || oṃ sarva-tathāgatoṣṇīṣānale avalokite curṇate jvarāśi || oṃ jvala jvala dhaka dhaka dhara dhara vidhara vidhara cchinda cchinda bhindha bhindha hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā || oṃ sarvatathāgatoṣṇīṣa hūṃ phaṭ svāhā ||
tadyathā | oṃ anale anale | khasame khasame | vaire vaire | saumye saumye | sarva-buddhādiṣṭhānādhiṣṭhite sarva-tathāgatoṣṇīṣa-sitātapatre hūṃ phaṭ | hūṃ ma ma hūṃ ni svāhā ||
The nāga-kings Ananta, Śaṅkhapāla, and Mahākṛṣṇa will send rain, clouds, and thunder in a timely manner.
For any type of danger this should be recited three times with the yoga of the Buddha.
The buddhas and bodhisattvas, together with the whole world of gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced and praised the speech of the Blessed One.
Thus concludes the noble dhāraṇī “The Supreme Accomplishment of Sitātapatrā Born from the Tathāgata’s Uṣṇīṣa, Great Invincible Dispeller.”