Entering the City of Omniscience An Aspiration Prayer for Actualizing Words of Truth
I offer homage to the source of an ocean of accomplishments: the Lamas and the Three Jewels and the bodhisattvas. I take refuge in you:
Grant your blessings, I pray!
In all my future lives, may I gain a precious human rebirth complete with all the eighteen freedoms and endowments, and may I become the student of an authentic master!
Training my mind through study, reflection and meditation, which are the source of higher rebirths and of definite goodness, may I follow the Buddha’s precious teachings!
May renunciation, the root of all dharma practice, and the four thoughts which cause renunciation, arise naturally in my mindstream, and may I see saṃsāra with all its endless activity as a prison or a fiery pit!
Gaining confidence in the infallibility of karma, may I strive to undertake even the smallest good deeds and abandon even the slightest harmful actions!
Not falling prey to adverse circumstances, busy places, distracting companions, or any other such obstacles on the path to enlightenment, may I take the Three Jewels as my refuge and train in the graduated path for beings of the three levels of spiritual capacity!
May I give up all my doubts regarding the master, the embodiment of all the sugatas, and without slipping into the mistaken view of considering him as an equal, may I see him as an actual buddha!
In this way, may my body, speech and mind be matured through the four empowerments, and so may I embark upon the path of the wondrous vajra vehicle!
Through the medium of fervent prayer and devotion, may the wisdom of the lineage be transferred into me, and may my realization become equal to space!
Perfecting the mahāyoga practices of the generation stage, may I come to perceive the whole universe and beings as the three maṇḍalas and traverse the four levels of a vidyādhara, just like the buddha’s heirs Padmasambhava and Vimalamitra!
Perfecting the practice of anuyoga, may all concepts of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa be purified into the state of indivisible bliss and emptiness, and may I experience the pure realm of Akaniṣṭha!
Perfecting the atiyoga practice of Dzogpachenpo, may all experience dissolve into the expanse of intrinsic reality, and may I be liberated into the youthful vase body, just like the vidyādhara Garab Dorje!
In short, beginning with the training in the conduct of the bodhisattvas, may whatever I do, with body, speech or mind, bring nothing but benefit to all sentient beings, my very own parents!
Whatever my situation or circumstance, may I never feel the slightest wish to follow worldly ways, which run contrary to the Dharma!
Even if, whilst under the sway of karma and habitual patterns, a mistaken thought occurs to me, may it never be successful!
For the sake of others, may I be fearless and ready even to give up my life, just like Prince Siddhārtha!
Having reached the state of spontaneously accomplishing the benefit of self and others, may I stir the depths of the ocean of saṃsāra’s three worlds by means of the ten strengths and four fearlessnesses!
The buddhas and bodhisattvas have vowed to work towards the accomplishment of unselfish aspiration prayers such as these.
Homage to the sages who proclaim the truth!
oṃ dhare dhare bhandare bhandare svāhā
May the strength of virtue increase!
May the power of aspiration grow!
May negativity be swiftly purified!
jaya jaya siddhi siddhi phala phala | 'a a ha sha sa ma | mama koling samanta