The Wish-Fulfilling Jewel The Outer Practice of Guru Yoga from the Heart-Essence of the Vast Expanse The Visualization for Receiving the Four Empowerments
Homage to the deity of the space of awareness!
Emaho! My entire perception, spontaneously perfect, is a realm of infinite purity,
The ‘Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory’, arrayed in complete and perfect detail. Here, in its very centre,
My own body is Vajrayoginī, 1
With one face and two hands, brilliant red and holding hooked knife and skull,
My two feet gracefully poised, my three eyes gazing into the sky.
Above my head, on a blossoming hundred thousand-petalled lotus, sun and moon disc seat,
Inseparable from my own root master, embodiment of all sources of refuge, appears
Guru Rinpoche, in the supreme nirmāṇakāya form of the ‘Lake-born Vajra’.
His body glows with youth, white with a tinge of red.
He wears a gown, monastic shawl, cloak and robe.
With one face, two hands and seated in royal poise.
In his right hand he holds the vajra, in his left a skullcup containing the vase of immortality.
On his head he wears a five-petalled lotus hat.
Cradled in his left arm he holds the ‘supreme consort’ of bliss and emptiness,
Concealed as the three-pointed khaṭvāṅga trident.
He presides amidst a shimmering aura of rays and rings of rainbow light.
All around him, enveloped in a beautiful lattice of white, blue, yellow, red and green light,
Are King Tri Songdetsen, the twenty-five disciples,
The paṇḍits, siddhas and vidyādharas of India and Tibet, yidam deities,
Ḍākinīs, and dharmapālas and protectors who keep the samaya—all gather like billowing clouds,
Visualized vivid and distinct, in the great equality of clarity and emptiness.
Hūṃ!  In the north-west of the land of Uḍḍiyāna,
In the heart of a lotus flower,
Endowed with the most marvellous attainments,
You are renowned as the ‘Lotus Born’,
Surrounded by many hosts of ḍākinīs.
Following in your footsteps,
I pray to you: Come, inspire me with your blessing!
guru padma siddhi hūṃ
Hrīḥ! As many times as there are atoms in the universe,
I multiply my body and offer you prostrations.
With both real offerings and those created in the mind through the power of samādhi,
I offer the entire universe in one vast ‘gesture of offering’.
All the harmful actions of my body, speech and mind,
I confess and purify in the luminosity of dharmakāya.
Whether they be relative or absolute,
I rejoice in all positive, virtuous actions.
I implore you to turn the wheel of Dharma of the three yānas.
Till saṃsāra is completely empty, and all beings liberated,
Do not pass into nirvāṇa, but remain here among us, I pray.
All the merit and positive actions of past, present and future,
I dedicate so that all beings may attain supreme enlightenment.
O Guru Rinpoche, Precious One,
You are the embodiment of
The compassion and blessing of all the buddhas,
The only protector of beings.
My body, my possessions, my heart and soul
Without hesitation, I surrender to you!
From now until I attain enlightenment,
In happiness or sorrow, in circumstances good or bad, in situations high or low:
I rely on you completely, O Pemajungne, you know me!
I have no one else to turn to;
In these evil times, the beings of the Kāliyuga
Are sinking in a swamp of intense and unbearable suffering.
Free us from all this, O great Guru!
Grant us the four empowerments, O blessed one!
Direct your realization into our minds, O compassionate one!
Purify our emotional and cognitive obscurations, O powerful one!
When my life is at an end,
With my entire perception the heaven of Ngayab Ling—‘the Glorious Copper-Coloured Mountain’,
The nirmāṇakāya pure land of indivisible appearance and emptiness—
My body, Vajrayoginī,
Is transformed into a radiant, shimmering sphere of light
And merging, inseparable, with Padmasambhava,
I shall attain buddhahood.
Then, from the play of vast primordial wisdom,
Which is the miraculous manifestation of bliss and emptiness,
For every single being in the three realms,
Let me appear as their true guide, to lead them to liberation—
Jetsün Padma, grant this, I pray!
I pray to you from the bottom of my heart,
It’s not just words or empty mouthings:
Grant your blessings from the depth of your wisdom mind,
And cause all my good aspirations to be fulfilled, I pray !
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma siddhi hūṃ
From the letter oṃ in the Guru’s 4 forehead, radiant and shimmering like moonlight,
Rays of light stream out and enter my forehead.
Negative actions of the body and obscurations of the channels 5 are purified.
The blessing of the vajra body of the buddhas infuses me,
The vase empowerment is obtained,
I become a receptive vessel for the generation phase of kyerim.
The seed of the ‘completely matured vidyādhara’ 6 is sown.
The potential for obtaining the level of nirmāṇakāya is implanted within me.
From the letter āḥ in his throat, blazing like a ruby,
Rays of light streak out and penetrate my throat.
Negative activity of the speech and obscurations of the inner air are purified,
The blessing of the vajra speech of the buddhas enters me,
The secret empowerment is obtained,
I become a receptive vessel for mantra recitation practice.
The seed of the ‘vidyādhara with power over life’ is sown.
The potential for obtaining the level of saṃbhogakāya is implanted within me.
At his heart, from the letter hūṃ, sky-coloured rays of light
Pour out and plunge into my heart.
Negative activity of the mind and obscurations of the bindu are purified.
The blessing of the vajra mind of all the buddhas is instilled in me,
The wisdom empowerment is obtained,
I become a receptive vessel for the caṇḍāli practice of bliss and emptiness.
The seed of the ‘mahāmudrā vidyādhara’ is sown.
The potential for obtaining the level of dharmakāya is implanted within me.
Again, from hūṃ in his heart, a second letter hūṃ bursts out like a shooting star
And merges indistinguishably one with my own mind.
The karma of the ‘ground of all’ 7 and cognitive obscurations are purified,
The blessing of the vajra wisdom pervades me,
The absolute empowerment, symbolized by the word, is obtained.
I become a receptive vessel for the primordial purity of Dzogpachenpo,
The seed of the ‘spontaneously accomplished vidyādhara’ is sown.
The potential for the svabhāvikakāya—the final fruition—is implanted within me.