Song Recalling the Great Guru of Oḍḍiyāna[1]
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Aho! Within a shimmering expanse of iridescent light
Is the spontaneous vidyādhara, the great Guru of Oḍḍiyāna—
Padmākara, universal embodiment of the oceanic Three Roots, care for me!
Turn your loving and compassionate gaze towards this child, right now!
O Lake-born Vajra, my only refuge, care for me! 
My one true father, Mahāguru, lord of all the hosts of ḍākinīs,
From the infinite mudrā-displays of your wisdom body,
Your melodious vajra speech, which proclaims the Dharma resoundingly,
And your luminous realisation, the all-pervasive sphere of spontaneous presence,
Shower down great vajra blessings upon my three doors of body, speech and mind.
Cause my deluded perception to dissolve within primordial purity.
In the naturally apparent display, the Lotus realm of the Glorious Mountain,
Resides naturally arising rigpa, the king of great bliss,
Padmavajra, whose illusory dance of supreme exaltation
Pervades all three worlds, ablaze with fivefold wisdom.
Throughout animate and inanimate, original, primordial buddhahood is manifest.
The enlightened activity of your manifestations, who tame disciples
In forms and realms throughout the sphere of reality, is inexhaustible.
Padmasambhava, omnipresent and ever perfect, care for me! 
Aho! The union of approach and accomplishment of the wondrous heart-essence
Irresistibly attracts the blessings, strength and capacity of your three secrets,
Which dissolve into me, so that I become inseparable from Nangsi Zilnön, 'He Who Prevails Over Existence and Appearance'.
Grant me, I implore you, the siddhi of accomplishment within this very life! 
Composed on the 11th day of the third month.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2023.

Bibliography
Tibetan Edition
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. (W1KG12986) Vol. 8: 477–478

Version: 1.0-20230110




The original is untitled; this title has been added by the translator.  ↩