Giver of the Light of Wisdom A Guru Yoga of the Omniscient Longchenpa Visualization Gathering the Accumulations Maṇḍala Offering Prayer Receiving Empowerment
Aḥ! Self-arisen clarity and emptiness, the dharmadhātu—
In the guru who possesses the primordial wisdom kāya
I take refuge with unwavering devotion.
I vow to lead beings to the guru’s level.
Ah. In the expanse in which clinging to environment and inhabitants is purified,
Amidst an expanse of rainbow light,
Upon a lion-throne, lotus and moon,
My own awareness manifests as the Omniscient Guru,
Smiling serenely, wearing the costume of a paṇḍita,
And adopting the gesture of finding comfort and ease in mind-as-such.
Within his form the maṇḍalas of the Three Roots are all complete.
Not generated, he is primordially perfect, spontaneously present—
Samayasattva and jñānasattva forever beyond union and separation.
He manifests clearly as great spontaneously present wisdom.
Within the non-duality of my own awareness and the deity,
I bow down in the homage of great purity and equalness.
While experiencing the equal taste of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, I offer.
In the expanse in which misdeeds and downfalls do not arise, I confess.
In the spontaneous freedom of awareness, I rejoice.
Remain, I pray, in great pervasiveness beyond transference.
Turn the wheel of effortless Dharma, I implore you.
In the great primordial freedom of the dharmadhātu, I dedicate.
The outer world filled with splendid riches
And its inhabitants’ aggregates and elements—
As a maṇḍala, clusters of rainbow light in space,
I offer to the ultimate deities of the three kāyas.
oṃ guru-maṇḍala-pūja āḥ hūṃ
You completely mastered the four luminous visions
And arose in the five kāyas of unchanging awareness,
Blazing with naturally arisen majesty and splendour—
Primordial protector Longchenpa,
Drimé Özer, to you I pay homage.
With single-pointed devotion, I pray to you:
Always bless me with your compassion.
Cause my wisdom experience to increase,
And, O Guru, let me become your equal.
oṃ āḥ mahāguru sarva siddhi hūṃ
O! Care for me! Omniscient guru, care for me!
Let your blessings infuse my mindstream.
Bestow the great empowerment of vajra wisdom
And sow the seeds of the four kāyas within me.
Through my single-pointed supplication,
The guru assumes a joyous expression
And blazes with blessings and resplendence.
From the guru’s forehead, throat and heart,
Replica forms and the three seed-syllables
Emerge together with light-rays and nectar,
Which, as they dissolve into my own three centres,
Purify obscurations, confer blessings and empowerment,
And establish the state of the four kāyas within my mind.
Finally the guru melts into light,
Becomes an orange dhīḥ syllable,
Which dissolves into the centre of my heart,
Perfecting the great strength of awareness-emptiness realization,
And I rest in the primordially pure state beyond the ordinary mind,
Free from the elaboration of speculative notions.
Once again, within the light sphere at my heart,
The syllable dhīḥ completely transforms
Into the sambhogakāya guru Mañjuśrī—
Orange, holding a sword and book,
Peaceful, smiling, with silk and jewel adornments,
And two legs crossed in the vajra posture.
At his heart upon a moon disc
Is a dhīḥ encircled by the mantra garland.
Light emanates, offers to the victors and their heirs
And collects all their blessings of knowledge and love.
The darkness of my mind’s delusion is dispelled,
And the light of its intelligence expands.
oṃ sarva-dharmābhāva-svabhāva viśuddha-vajra a ā aṃ aḥ |
prakṛti-pariśuddhāḥ sarva-dharmā yad uta sarva-tathāgata-jñāna-kāya-mañjuśrī-pariśuddhitām upādāyeti a āḥ |
sarva-tathāgata-hṛdayaṃ hara hara |
oṃ hūṃ hrīḥ bhagavan jñāna-mūrti vāg-īśvara mahā-vāca sarva-dharma gaganāmala-supariśuddha-dharma-dhātu-jñāna-garbha āḥ | 1
oṃ a ra pa ca na dhīḥ
Through this virtue, may all infinite sentient beings
Realize the state of the omniscient King of Dharma
And the wisdom being Mañjuśrī
Within this very lifetime,
And may the citadel of the three worlds be emptied.