The Flute of Profound Meaning
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Aho! At the peak of glorious, unsurpassed Samye Chimphu
Is a naturally arisen pavilion of white crystal rock.
This great palace, uncreated ands spontaneous, is a source of joy. 
In the vast basic space of the pure blue sky, free from limits,
The maṇḍala of clear light, the sun and moon, shines brightly,
Affording the wondrous spectacle of rigpa’s optimal strength,
Perceived with eyes of directly beholding dharmatā—how amazing! 
This yogin’s visions are without direction and unimpeded,
The self-radiance of rigpa, the lamp of self-arisen knowledge.
Such boundless suffusion within the sky of the outer expanse
Brings confidence in the natural state of the spontaneous three kāyas. 
There’s no need to search for buddhahood elsewhere: it’s enitrely within.
Concrete notions of generation and perfection projected by the mind,
Exertion undertaken while caught within a web of speculative ideas
And uncertain thought—what is the use of it all? 
Maṇḍalas of the radiance of uncontrived, ever-pure awareness
Are arranged according to the visions in which they appear.
When the noble buddhas thus come forth as my witnesses,
A personal certainty, devoid of doubt, dawns from within. 
Non-conceptuality might arise for a while through tightly binding
The rope that is strenuous manipulation of the channels and energies,
But since this is partly contaminated by the ālaya, it only obscures
Naturally arising wisdom and is not the genuine state itself. 
The mind-made tenets of the eight vehicles are mere replicas,
Like the false reflection of the moon, far from the natural state.
We holders of the lineage of the vidyādhara and warrior Garab
Are spontaneously liberated from the trap of conceptuality. 
Naturally occurring, naturally arising, naturally present, Samantabhadra’s play.
Aho! The direct perception of the natural state of the original ground! 
In the state of clear light, free from object and process of meditation,
The brilliance of the natural, spontaneous and all-pervasive clusters
Is a naturally occurring vision, undesigned and uncreated—how amazing! 
Deluded thoughts and dualistic perception dissolve in the vast space of dharmatā
Without the need for prolonged hardship and effort over many months and years. 
While I rest happily, the karmic winds approach their exhaustion
And I experience all the signs that the blessings of the vidyādhara lineage
Of the luminous heart-essence have passed into the core of my heart—how amazing! 
This song arose spontaneously through the condition of feeling happy while in the Lönchen Gurkar (White Pavilion of the Senior Ministers) cave[1] at Samye Chimphu on the 29th day of the third month of the Fire Monkey year (1956). Although I do not possess such a level of realization myself, this may serve to create the interdependent circumstances for it to arise in future.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2023.

Bibliography
Tibetan Edition
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "glu zab don gling bu/" In 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. (W1KG12986) Vol. 8: 429–431
Secondary Sources
Akester, Matthew. Jamyang Khyentsé Wangpo's Guide to Central Tibet. Chicago: Serindia Publications, 2016.

Version: 1.0-20230109




For more on this cave see Akester Jamyang Khyentsé Wangpo's Guide to Central Tibet, p. 224  ↩