The Noble Mārīcī Dhāraṇī
In the language of India: Āryamārīcī-nāma-dhāraṇī
In the language of Tibet: Pakma özer chen shé chawé zung (‘phags ma ‘od zer can zhes bya ba’i gzungs)
In the English language: The Noble Incantation of Mārīcī
Homage to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas!
Thus have I heard.
Once the Blessed One was dwelling in Śrāvastī, in Anāthapiṇḍada’s garden in the Jetavana grove,
Together with a great gathering of twelve hundred and fifty monks,
And a great gathering of many bodhisattva mahāsattvas.
At that time, the Blessed One said to the monks:
“Monks, there is a goddess called Mārīcī.
She travels before the sun and moon.
She is invisible, ungraspable, unstoppable, insuperable, indomitable, unsurpassable, unassailable, invulnerable, unconquerable, imperishable, and invincible.
Monks, whoever recalls the goddess Mārīcī’s name likewise will become invisible, ungraspable, unstoppable, insuperable, indomitable, unsurpassable, unassailable, invulnerable, unconquerable, imperishable, and invincible.
Thus, I myself, by recalling the goddess Mārīcī’s name, have become invisible, ungraspable, unstoppable, insuperable, indomitable, unsurpassable, unassailable, invulnerable, unconquerable, imperishable, and invincible.
The sacred mantra is as follows:
tadyathā | oṃ padākramasi parākramasi udayamasi nairamasi arkamasi markamasi uramamasi 1 vanamasi gulmamasi cīvaramasi mahā-cīvaramasi antardhānamasi svāhā ||
oṃ, goddess Mārīcī, please protect me on the road! Please protect me from taking wrong paths! Please protect me from dangerous beings! Please protect me from the danger of tyrants! Please protect me from the danger of elephants! Please protect me from the danger of thieves! Please protect me from the danger of nāgas! Please protect me from the danger of lions! Please protect me from the danger of tigers! Please protect me from the danger of fire! Please protect me from the danger of water! Please protect me from the danger of snakes! Please protect me from the danger of poison! Please protect me from the danger of opponents and adversaries!
In all instances, disturbed or undisturbed, weakened or not, 2 please protect me from lions! Please protect me from tigers! Please protect me from nāgas! Please protect me from snakes! Svāhā! Please protect me from all dangers, harm, infectious disease and adversity! Protect! Protect!
namo ratna-trayāya | oṃ ālo tālo kālo sacchalo saṃbhamūrdhati 3 rakṣa rakṣa māṃ ||
Please protect me and all beings from all adversity, danger and disease! Svāhā!
Homage to the Three Jewels!
Homage to the goddess Mārīcī!
Recite this, the heart-essence of Mārīcī:
tadyathā | oṃ vattālī vadālī varālī varāha-mukhī | sarva-duṣṭa-pra-duṣṭānāṃ cakṣur-mukhaṃ bandha bandha | bandha mukhaṃ jambhaya stambhaya mohaya svāhā | oṃ mārīcyai svāhā | oṃ varālī vadālī vattālī varāha-mukhī sarva-duṣṭa-pra-duṣṭānāṃ cakṣur-mukhaṃ bandha bandha svāhā || 4
When the Blessed One had said this, the monks and bodhisattva mahāsattvas, together with the whole assembly and the world of gods, human beings, asuras and gandharvas, rejoiced and praised the speech of the Blessed One.