Adornment of Lord Nāgārjuna’s Wisdom Mind The Fourfold Maṇḍala Offering to Tārā The Preparation The Main Practice Part One: Relying on the Three Jewels 1. Taking Refuge and Uplifting Your Mind to Awakening 2. Taking the Vow of Awakened Heroes 3. Consecrating the Place 4. Consecratng the Offerings 5. Remembering the Qualities of the Three Jewels 6. Inviting the Deities 7. Requesting the Deities to Remain 8. Performing the Cleansing Ritual 9. Making Offerings 10. Rendering Praise 11. Presenting an Extensive Maṇḍala Offering 12. Stating Your Wishes Part Two: Relying on Exalted Tārā 1. Visualizing the Deities 2. Inviting the Deities 3. Receiving the Bestowal of Empowerment 4. Sealing the Union of Visualized and Wisdom Deities with a Gesture 5. Presenting the Seven-Part Service 6. Perform the cleansing ritual 7. Making Offerings 8. Present an Extensive Maṇḍala Offering 9. Rendering Praise 10. Paying Homage 11. Approaching the Sacred Circle with Mantra Recitation 12. Making Supplications The Conclusion 1. Offering Tormas Offer the first torma Offer the second torma: Offer the third torma: Offer the fourth torma: 2. Admission of Faults 3. Request for the Deities to Remain in their Representations Forever 4. Dedication of Goodness 5. Making Auspicious Wishes
Your name and lotus insignia
Arise as a sweet song to the ears:
I pay homage to you, Tārā, sole and certain dispeller
Of the misfortunes of the eight dangers.
Until reaching awakening,
I take refuge in the Buddha, the teachings, and the sublime assembly.
Fueled by the goodness of generosity and the other transcendent perfections,
May I attain enlightenment for the sake of all beings!
May all beings have happiness and the causes of happiness.
May all beings be free from suffering and the causes of suffering.
May all beings never part from true happiness without a trace of suffering.
May all beings live in equanimity, free from attachment to dear ones and aversion to enemies.
Until reaching the very heart of enlightenment,
I take refuge in the buddhas.
I take refuge in the teachings,
And likewise, in the assembly of awakened heroes.
The buddhas of the past
Uplifted their minds to awakening,
And followed the stages of training
As awakened heroes.
As they did, I will uplift my mind to awakening
For the sake of the welfare of others.
As they did, I will follow the stages of training
As an awakened hero.
Today my life is fruitful:
I’ve gained an excellent human rebirth,
Am now born into the clan of enlightenment,
And have become the buddha’s holy child.
Today, in the presence of all who grant refuge,
I invite all beings to enjoy happiness
Until they reach enlightenment.
May the gods, demi-gods, and all beings rejoice!
May the ground be pure everywhere:
Free from gravel and other sharp objects,
Level like the palm of the hand,
Smooth and wrought from beryl.
oṃ hūṃ trāṃ hrīḥ āḥ
Divine substances and meditative states produce clouds of outer, inner, and secret offerings. Their essence, wisdom nectar, appears as cloudbanks of all sense pleasures without end. May these multiply to become the display of Awakened Hero Ever-Excellent's offerings! 2
oṃ vajra-arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda āḥ hūṃ
namo ratna-trayāya | oṃ namo bhagavate vajrasārapramardane tathāgatāyārhate samyaksaṃbuddhāya tadyathā | oṃ vajra vajra mahāvajra mahātejavajra mahāvidyāvajra mahābodhicittavajra mahābodhimaṇḍopasaṃkramaṇavajra sarvakarmāvaraṇaviśodhanavajra svāhā
The Buddha, the transcendent conqueror advanced to the true nature, defeated enemies, and attained complete and perfect enlightenment. He is aware and venerable.
The Buddha advanced to bliss and knows the world.
He is the leader of all beings to be guided and is unsurpassable.
The enlightened one, the transcendent conqueror, is the superlative teacher of gods and humans. The Buddha and all things benevolent have the same basis.
He is the inexhaustible source of all ennobling qualities.
He is fully ornamented with forbearance.
He is the foundation of all treasure troves of goodness.
The eighty excellent signs of physical perfection adorn him,
As does the blossoming flower of the thirty-two signs of physical perfection.
The Buddha’s every act is fitting.
When you see him, nothing is disagreeable.
He brings tangible joy to those endowed with respect and devotion.
His sublime insight cannot be overcome.
His might cannot be suppressed.
The Buddha is the teacher of all beings,
The father of awakened heroes,
The sovereign among exalted individuals,
And the leader of everyone to the citadel of the transcendence of misery.
His wisdom is immeasurable;
His confidence, inconceivable.
His speech is pure;
His voice, melodious.
His face is irresistibly beautiful.
His physical form is incomparable.
He is not a desire or form realm being,
And he’s distinct from the formless realm.
He is completely free of suffering.
He liberated his aggregates, unburdened himself of the sense elements,
And restrained his sense bases.
The Buddha has cut every knot.
Entirely liberated from yearning of any sort,
He's free from existence.
He has crossed the river.
The Buddha’s wisdom is wholly complete.
The Buddha abides in the wisdom of all enlightened transcendent conquerors throughout past, present, and future.
He doesn't dwell suspended in the transcendence of misery.
He is correct.
He has entered the state in which he sees all beings.
These constitute the true, supreme qualities of the buddhas, enlightened transcendent conquerors.
The sacred teachings are noble at the start, the middle, and the end.
Their meanings are excellent, their words superlative and entirely precise.
The teachings are utterly complete, pure, and distilled.
The enlightened transcendent conqueror eloquently expresses the teachings.
The teachings view reality correctly, are uncompromised by weakness, and have timeless continuity.
They are highly acclaimed.
To see the teachings is significant.
The wise discern the teachings through their individual direct awareness.
Teachings presented by the transcendent conqueror are firmly grounded in ethical discipline.
These teachings foster renunciation, propelling beings to complete awakening.
The meaning and words of the teachings are always in accord. The compilations of the teachings are complete, with nothing left out.
They are trustworthy and put an end to wandering.
The spiritual community has entered the greater approach in an excellent manner,
With understanding, honesty, and harmony.
The community is worthy of homage and veneration.
It is the field for cultivating stores of glorious goodness.
Offerings given to the spiritual community
Are entirely pure.
It is the foremost recipient of gifts and every form of support.
Lord protector of all beings, neglecting none,
You relentlessly vanquished the hordes of demons.
Transcendent conqueror, knower of all reality just as it is,
Come here with your entire retinue, I pray.
Transcendent conqueror, for many countless eons
You have loved all beings and thought of those worthy of compassion.
Now is the time to fulfill your sweeping aspirations
By helping others as you always intended.
I beseech you to come here with your entire retinue
From the ever-present palace of space.
Display myriad miracles and benedictions
In order to liberate infinite numbers of beings.
vajra-samaya
Transcendent conqueror, welcome—
We’re so lucky you’ve come here!
We beseech you to remain in this place
To receive our gifts and offerings.
padma kamalāyas tvaṃ
This bathhouse is suffused with sweet aromas.
Its crystal floor boasts a brilliant sheen,
On which stand rows of attractive jeweled columns
And a dazzling pearl canopy.
Accompanied by songs and music,
I take many jeweled vases
Filled with pleasing, scented water to bathe the bodies
Of those advanced to the true nature, with their heirs.
I dry their bodies with incomparable cloth,
Clean and deeply scented.
I offer them the finest robes,
Well-dyed and exquisitely fragrant.
I take myriad fine garments, delicate and soft,
And hundreds of exceptional ornaments
To adorn exalted awakened heroes,
Such as Ever-Excellent, Gentle Melody, and Lord of the World. 3
Like polishing refined pure gold,
I anoint the radiant bodies of all buddhas
With the best of fragrances,
Whose scents pervade the cosmos.
All transcendent buddhas—lions among humanity—
Of the past, present, and future
In as many worlds as there are in the ten directions:
To each and every one of you I pay homage with awe in thought, word, and deed.
All triumphant buddhas rise vividly to mind
Through the force of my aspirations to live with my best heart forward.
I replicate my body in numbers equal to the atoms in this realm
To bow to you all in utmost deference.
On each atom dwell as many buddhas as there are atoms,
Each buddha in the midst of their spiritual children.
I imagine such triumphant buddhas filling the entirety
Of the infinite womb of all things.
With endless oceans of hymns
In seas of melodious tones in all tongues,
I give full voice to the qualities of all victors
As I acclaim you, joyful buddhas.
Holy flowers, holy garlands,
Music, balms, the finest parasols,
The best lamps, and sacred incense—
All these I offer to you, triumphant ones.
Holy clothing, the finest perfumes, and medicinal powders
Piled as tall as the highest mountain—
All these in special exquisite arrays
I offer to you, triumphant buddhas.
With the force of faith in life lived with my best heart forward
And with my devotion toward all victors,
I take these gifts, vast and unsurpassed,
And present homage and offerings to all triumphant buddhas.
I divulge and admit
Each and every wrongdoing
I did in thought, word, and deed
While engrossed in desire, anger, and stupidity.
I rejoice in every goodness of all triumphant buddhas in the ten directions,
The goodness of their spiritual children and of solitary sages,
The goodness of those on paths of training or the path of no further training,
And the goodness of all beings.
Lights of every world in the ten directions who awakened,
Then gradually gained enlightenment free from attachment—
Lord defenders of beings—
I ask you to set in motion the wheel of the highest doctrine.
Those of you who weigh
Whether to show us how to pass beyond sorrow,
I beg you with folded hands, to stay alive for the good and the joy of all
During as many eons as there are atoms in this realm.
Whatever slight store of ennobling acts
I have collected by this homage,
Offering, admission, rejoicing, request, and supplication,
I dedicate it all to awakening.
To you, powerful sages, supreme recipient of offerings,
I offer entrancing flowers of every delicious scent—
Lily, lotus, blue lotus, and others—
Strung into magnificent garlands, the most attractive offering.
Aromas waft from the finest, captivating incense,
Diffusing into billowing clouds of incense I offer.
I present various foods and drinks—
Divine ambrosia.
I offer jeweled vessels
Filled with row upon row of golden lotus flowers.
Fresh fruit and beautiful flowers
Are spread across the level ground, anointed with perfume.
Compelling songs and praises resound in a celestial palace,
Beautifully decorated with strands of pearls and jewels.
I offer these ornaments of infinite space
To you whose very nature is compassion.
A jeweled, elegant parasol with a golden handle
Has an attractive form that adorns the horizon.
Aloft with a perfect shape, gorgeous to behold:
This I always offer to you, powerful sages.
I present collections of offerings beyond these:
Music in sweet, captivating melodies
That alleviates beings’ sufferings—
May clouds of each offering remain.
May rains of gems, flowers, and other offerings
Descend continually upon the sacred doctrine
And all its jewels,
And on stūpas and sacred images.
Just as Gentle Melody and other bodhisattvas
Presented offerings to the victors,
I make these offerings to you,
Lord protectors advanced to the true nature, and your heirs.
I praise your vast qualities in song
With oceans of melodies.
May these lilting clouds of melodious acclaim
Surely reach all of you.
All buddhas gone beyond throughout the past, present, and future;
The teachings; and sublime assembly:
I bow to you with bodies equal in number
To every atom in every realm.
I bow to awakened heroes—the very basis of the intention to awaken—
And to all stūpas,
Venerating the learned masters, vajra masters,
And those who have fully mastered fearless conduct.
Supremely compassionate lord protector,
You are the all-knowing teacher.
Field of boundless goodness and qualities,
To you, the Buddha advanced to the true nature, I pay homage.
The teachings are pure and bring about freedom from desire and attachment.
They foster ennobling qualities that liberate beings from miserable existences.
In essence, they are sublime and ultimate.
To the teachings, serenity itself, I pay homage.
Members of the spiritual community,
You gained freedom and went on to show others the path to freedom.
Deeply respectful of the three forms of training,
To you, the true field of qualities, I pay homage.
I send out bodies equal in number
To every atom in every realm.
These pay homage in every way
To all those worthy of praise.
The sacred awakened hero, Holy White Topknot, 5
Came from the immortal city in the Heaven of Hundreds of Joys,
To enter into the vessel of Doe Eyes, Mahāmāyā Devī,
Who held the successor of the Śākya clan.
Like daybreak of one thousand lights over the eastern mountains,
She gave birth, a lotus fully blossomed, to you in Lumbinī grove.
Brahma and Indra served you with reverence and made you resplendent.
It was foretold that you would join the rank of buddhas.
Among the young and arrogant Śākya youths,
You excelled with prowess in the sixty-four skills.
As all bowed to you,
Your renown was established in the thoughts, eyes, and ears of all.
The noose of desire and lust never enslaved you,
But to please your father and to protect your dominion,
You regarded as illusory your magical queens.
For that you were named Siddhārtha, Accomplisher of Everything Meaningful: to you I pay homage.
You entirely resisted the draw of ruling the kingdom.
Four events captured your attention
And led you to renunciation:
You demonstrated the process of becoming a natural monk.
On the banks of Nairañjanā River, your deep, unflagging perseverance
Allowed you to face extreme austerities with brave forbearance
And foster meditative states that tame thoughts.
This delighted the buddhas everywhere: to you I pay homage
Throughout the three countless eons of your existences,
Your discernment was entirely shaped by the cultivation of goodness and wisdom.
In order to fulfill your path, you walked to the tree of awakening, struck fear in the demons,
And attained manifest and perfect enlightenment, as all buddhas do.
With the boat of the three wheels of the doctrine,
You liberated those drowning in the bottomless and endless abyss of the round of rebirth,
Ferrying them to a state of freedom and omniscience:
To you I pay homage.
In the city of Śravastī, you used magical powers
To silence the tongues of heretical teachers
Who were drunk on their analytical prowess and lack of self-restraint.
You won the contest and left them humiliated, their prestige drained.
You attained the summit of the four supports of miraculous ability.
You were never susceptible to the pangs of birth, aging, sickness, and death,
Yet to inspire disillusion in those heedless of death’s certainty,
You demonstrated the transcendence of misery: to you I bow.
You left behind eight portions of multiplying relics—
Physical articles meant to encourage all those with meager merit
To greatly increase their positive qualities—
And dissolved into the womb of reality.
Like you, I will perfect the stages of completion, maturation, and cultivation.
In the supreme pure land called Unsurpassable, beyond the three realms,
I will attain manifest enlightenment, and through the ten deeds of the manifest body of enlightenment,
May I equal you, omniscient one, in serving beings!
oṃ vajrabhūmi āḥ hūṃ
This foundation is the entirely pure mighty golden ground.
oṃ vajrarekhe āḥ hūṃ
I offer the bordering iron mountains that encircle the central hūṃ;
Mount Meru, sovereign among mountains, standing in the center;
In the east, the continent Noble Body;
In the South, the continent Rose Apple;
In the West, the continent Wish-fulfilling Cow;
In the North, the continent Ominous Sound;
Body and Excellent Body, to the East;
Tail Fan and Minor Tail Fan, to the South;
Tremulous and Great Destiny, to the West;
And Ominous Sound and Satellite of Ominous Sound, to the North.
I offer jewel mountain; Wish-fulfilling tree;
Wish-granting cow; Spontaneous harvest.
I offer precious wheel; Priceless gem;
Esteemed queen; Valued minister;
Cherished elephant; Treasured horse;
Esteemed general; And vase of abundant treasure;
I offer goddess of allure; Goddess of garlands;
Goddess of song; Goddess of dance;
Goddess of flowers; Goddess of incense;
Goddess of illumination; And goddess of perfume.
I offer the sun; The moon; Jeweled parasol;
And banner of universal victory.
I offer these magnificent glories and riches of gods and humans, complete and flawless,
To the illustrious holy root and lineage lamas, the wisdom deities, the hosts of sacred circles of deities, and the buddhas and assembly of awakened heroes.
I beseech you, in your great compassion, to accept these offerings for the sake of all beings.
Accepting them, grant your blessings, I pray.
I offer this ground, anointed with perfume and strewn with flowers,
Adorned by Supreme Mountain, the four continents, and the sun and moon:
Imagining this as a buddha land,
By virtue of this offering, may all beings enjoy this pure land.
idam ratna maṇḍala kaṃ nirya tayāmi
May the doctrine,
Sole source of benefit and happiness, long remain.
May the victory banner of the lives
Of those who uphold the doctrine stand firm.
May the doctrine,
Sole panacea for beings’ pain
And source of all bliss,
Remain rich and revered.
May all temples be well established
And adorned with study and recitation.
May the spiritual community be harmonious
And always accomplish what is meaningful.
May the sum of my goodness
Lead anyone in any place,
Whose mind or body is afflicted by any form of sickness or suffering,
To seas of bliss and joy.
For as long as any beings
Live in the round of rebirth,
May their happiness never decline.
May beings attain the ceaseless bliss of awakened heroes.
However many beings there are in hell
In any worldly realm,
May they feel comfort and happiness
And become joyful.
May those stricken with cold become warm.
May the endless streams of rain that flow
From the vast clouds of awakened mind
Bring soothing cool to those overcome by heat.
May animals be free of the terror
Of being eaten by one another.
May all starving spirits enjoy happiness
Equal to the humans who live on the continent of Ominous Sound.
May the blind see.
May the deaf always hear.
May all pregnant women safely give birth
Just as the Buddha’s mother Mahāmāyā Devī did.
May those who are naked find clothing.
May the hungry have food.
May those who thirst enjoy water
And delicious beverages to drink.
May the destitute gain wealth.
May the depressed be joyful.
May even pessimists find renewed hope
And gain magnificent stability.
May every sick individual
Be quickly cured of disease.
May all illness, without exception,
Never occur under any circumstance.
May the fearful be dauntless.
May those in bondage be free.
May the powerless gain strength
And wish to help others.
May travelers experience well-being
Wherever they go.
May they effortlessly
Reach their journey’s end.
May those who embark on boats and planes 6
Arrive at their intended destination:
Once they reach the far shore
Together with the pilot, may they rejoice.
May those who wander lost and anxious
Meet with other travelers.
Then, finding their way free of all threats, such as thieves, bandits, and tigers,
May they proceed unwearied in comfort.
When defenseless, frightened children and elderly people
Travel through untracked wilderness
And succumb to the deep intoxication of sleep,
May the gods protect them.
May the gods send timely rains
To produce glorious harvests.
May rulers adhere to the Buddhist doctrine
And may their worldly dominions flourish.
May medicines be potent
And may recitations of mantra be effective.
May non-human worldly beings, such as ḍākinīs and ogres,
Be compassionate.
May humans, whose bodies are better than those of the gods,
Never feel the sufferings of miserable existences
Or undergo hardship:
May they swiftly attain enlightenment!
May all awakened heroes
Accomplish their intention—the welfare of beings.
May all beings
Gain everything these lord protectors intend!
oṃ mahā-śūnyatājñāna vajra-svabhāv-ātmako ‘ham
Within emptiness, a lotus arises from the syllable paṃ
And the circle of the moon from a. Upon it stands the syllable taṃ, from which unfolds a blue lotus marked with taṃ. Its shining light presents offerings to exalted beings
And brings all sentient beings to enlightenment. The light returns to taṃ and changes into noble Tārā, a beautiful sixteen year-old, green in color, who sits before me.
She wears jeweled ornaments and a multi-colored silk skirt, as well as an upper garment. Sheer silks cover her breasts.
Her hair is swept up on the left side and hangs down freely behind on the right.
Her right hand makes the gesture of supreme generosity. In her left, she holds the stem of a blue lotus at the level of her heart. Its flower, marked by a wheel, blossoms at her left ear.
A moon-like halo shines at her back.
Around her sit twenty other forms of Tārā on two concentric sets of ten lotus petals. Each Tārā sits in a posture like the central figure, is a different color, and bears her own insignia atop the blue lotus held in her left hand. In front sits Swift Heroine, red, wrathful and smiling. She exudes a mood of passion. Her blue lotus holds a conch shell, its spiral twisting to the right.
Likewise, in a clockwise direction from her, sits Melodious Goddess, 7 the color of the autumn moon, with a crystal mirror marked with the syllable hrīṃ.
Supreme Treasure of Goodness, yellow-blue, has a jewel.
Victorious Topknot, yellow, has a longevity vase.
Kurukullā, red, has a bow and arrow.
Terrifying Goddess, dark red, has a dagger.
Invincible, black and frowning, has a sword.
Undefeated, dark red and frowning, has a vajra.
Conqueror of the Three Worlds, red, has a victory banner.
Jewel Treasure, red and frowning, has a treasure vase.
Auspicious Accomplisher, yellow, has an endless knot.
Army that Defeats Enemies, red, has a vajra with outspread prongs.
Wrathful Frown, black, has a wooden club.
Utmost Pacification, bright white, has a pitcher.
Blazing Light, red, has a vajra cross.
Boundlessly Overwhelming, saffron color, has a stupa.
Peacock Goddess, bright white, has a moon.
Undefeated Victory, bright white, has a parasol.
Goddess of Hermitages, orange, has a container.
Light Rays, pink, has a golden fish.
Each Tārā sits with one leg bent inward, the other partially extended. Within her heart stands a taṃ syllable on the circle of a lotus and moon. Taṃ radiates light, inviting the buddhas and their retinues of assembled awakened heroes from Potalaka Mountain to the twenty-one noble Tārās. Vajra-samaya.
Tārā, born of a green syllable taṃ,
Buddha Boundless Light crowns you.
Come here from the sublime land of Potala, I pray.
You carry out every act of the buddhas of all times—
For the sake of beings, pray come to this place.
Arise, arise, goddess endowed with ten powers!
You, the three jewels, care for beings
With compassion that never fades with time.
I beseech you, victors with your retinues, to come to this place
Replete with offerings I’ve arrayed and those I’ve mentally created.
vajra samaya jaḥ
Holy flowers, holy garlands,
Music, balms, the finest parasols,
The best lamps, and sacred incense—
All these I offer to you, triumphant ones.
oṃ vajra-puṣpe āḥ hūṃ
oṃ vajra-dhūpe āḥ hūṃ
oṃ vajra-āloke āḥ hūṃ
oṃ vajra-gandhe āḥ hūṃ
oṃ vajra-naivedye āḥ hūṃ
oṃ vajra-śabda āḥ hūṃ
All transcendent conquerors, those advanced to the true nature,
All great and transcendent conquerors,
Lords whose very nature is compassion:
Grant me empowerment, I pray!
As soon as the Buddha was born,
The gods bathed him,
We likewise bathe your body
With this water of the gods.
oṃ sarva-tathāgata abhiṣekata samaya śrīye hūṃ
This bestowal of empowerment causes the water from the vases to fill their bodies, cleansing all impurities. The excess water wells up at the crown of the central deity's head to become Accomplisher of Meaningful Acts. 8
Each Tārā is likewise crowned with the buddha of her respective enlightened clan.
All the deities who granted empowerment become Tārā.
jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
The visualized and wisdom deities dissolve indivisibly into one another.
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā
Gods and demi-gods bow their crowned heads
Respectfully at your lotus feet.
Liberating mother, who saves us from every misery,
To you I pay homage.
With utterly lucid faith, I pay homage
To noble Exalted Tārā
And all the victors with their heirs
Who dwell in every direction throughout past, present, and future.
I present material and mentally created offerings,
Such as flowers, incense, lights, perfume, food, and music,
To the assembly of exalted deities:
Accept them, I pray!
I admit all wrongdoing I’ve done
Under the sway of mental afflictions,
Including the ten corrupting acts and the five incomparable trespasses,
Committed since time immemorial until now.
I rejoice in all goodness cultivated
Through ennobling acts of the past, present, and future
By all beings, including pious attendants,
Solitary sages, awakened heroes, and ordinary individuals.
I beseech you to teach
The great, lesser, and common spiritual approaches
According to the range
Of beings’ intentions and capacities.
I implore you not to transcend misery
Until the round of rebirth is entirely emptied.
Watch over all beings drowning in seas of suffering
And compassionately care for us, I pray.
May whatever goodness I've cultivated
Result in awakening.
May I become, without a moment's delay,
A glorious guide to beings!
Accompanied by songs and music,
I take many jeweled vases
Filled with pleasing, scented water to bathe the bodies
Of those advanced to the true nature, with their heirs.
I dry their bodies with incomparable cloth,
Clean and deeply scented.
I offer them the finest robes,
Well-dyed and exquisitely fragrant.
I take myriad fine garments, delicate and soft,
And hundreds of exceptional ornaments
To adorn exalted awakened heroes,
Such as Ever-Excellent, Gentle Melody, and Lord of the World.
Like polishing refined pure gold,
I anoint the radiant bodies of all buddhas
With the best of fragrances,
Whose scents pervade the cosmos.
oṃ vajrabhūmi āḥ hūṃ
This foundation is the entirely pure mighty golden ground.
oṃ vajrarekhe āḥ hūṃ
I offer the bordering iron mountains that encircle the central hūṃ;
Mount Meru, sovereign among mountains, standing in the center;
In the east, the continent Noble Body;
In the South, the continent Rose Apple;
In the West, the continent Wish-fulfilling Cow;
In the North, the continent Ominous Sound;
Body and Excellent Body, to the East;
Tail Fan and Minor Tail Fan, to the South;
Tremulous and Great Destiny, to the West;
And Ominous Sound and Satellite of Ominous Sound, to the North.
I offer jewel mountain; Wish-fulfilling tree;
Wish-granting cow; Spontaneous harvest.
I offer precious wheel; Priceless gem;
Esteemed queen; Valued minister;
Cherished elephant; Treasured horse;
Esteemed general; And vase of abundant treasure;
I offer goddess of allure; Goddess of garlands;
Goddess of song; Goddess of dance;
Goddess of flowers; Goddess of incense;
Goddess of illumination; And goddess of perfume.
I offer the sun; The moon; Jeweled parasol;
And banner of universal victory.
I offer these magnificent glories and riches of gods and humans, complete and flawless,
To the illustrious holy root and lineage lamas, the wisdom deities, the hosts of sacred circles of deities, and the buddhas and assembly of awakened heroes.
I beseech you, in your great compassion, to accept these offerings for the sake of all beings.
Accepting them, grant your blessings, I pray.
I offer this ground, anointed with perfume and strewn with flowers,
Adorned by Supreme Mountain, the four continents, and the sun and moon:
Imagining this as a buddha land,
By virtue of this offering, may all beings enjoy this pure land.
idam ratna maṇḍala kaṃ nirya tayāmi
Goddess, you manifested from the tear
On Supreme Compassion’s lotus face. 10
Swiftly liberating hero
Who shelters us from all fears, to you I bow.
All beings flounder
In the vast ocean of mental afflictions.
You save us from being overcome
By the foolish elephant of conformity: to you I bow.
You’re a safe haven from the fearsome ogres
Of entangling doubts and habituation with craving and attachment—
Chains that bind the ultimate nature of reality
Within dualistic experience: to you I bow.
You quell at once the turbulent rapids of desire,
And the fierce flames of deeply ingrained anger
That fuel infernos:
To you I bow.
You secure us against the thieves that steal attainment of the supreme state—
Routine discipline that regards the mountain of perishable phenomena as an existent self.
You protect us from the fearsome snakes of jealousy
That see appearances as the enemy: to you I bow.
You shelter us from the claws of the lion of pride—
Which value ethical conduct as best—
And all we fear, such as a ruler’s punishment, enemies, demonic forces, leprosy,
Separation from loved ones, poverty, lightning, and failure:
To you who protect from all fear and danger,
I offer praise.
Om! To noble Exalted Tārā, Liberator, I pay homage!
Homage! Taré, swift heroine;
You conquer all hordes of demons, zombies, and ogres: Best Turé!
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture bodhicitta svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture dānatraya svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture prajñā 11 hrīṃ hrīṃ svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture mahāpuṇye svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture āyurdade bhrūṃ svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture kurukulle nṛ jaḥ svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture sarva-vighnān baṃ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture vajra-taka hana liccha phaṭ svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture daha paca hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture loka-vāśaṃ kuru svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture mama vasu puṣṭiṃ kuru svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture maṅgala-śrī mahā-pāṇi svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture vajra-jvala phaṭ phaṭ rakṣa rakṣa svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture hūṃ hūṃ haṃsaṃ trignān phaṭ svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture sarva-pāpaṃ gate gate svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture tramdu trina tramdu phaṭ svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture hūṃ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture sarva-viṣa tara phaṭ svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture hūṃ hūm phaṭ phaṭ rakṣa rakṣa māṃ svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture nāmas tāre manohara 12 hūṃ hara svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture mārīcyai tsé bhrūṃ nṛ jaḥ svāhā
Noble and compassionate Transcendent Conqueror,
We beseech you to help us, beings infinite in number:
Purify our two obscurations and quickly complete our twofold cultivation of goodness and wisdom
So that we may attain perfect enlightenment.
Until then, throughout all our series of lifetimes,
Have us find supreme happiness among gods and humans,
And help us avoid obstacles, evil spirits, epidemics, illness,
And all that impedes our spiritual practice to gain omniscience.
We beseech you to swiftly pacify and eliminate
The eight major fears and any other threats,
Including fatal diseases,
Nightmares, and evil omens.
May all auspiciousness, happiness, and magnificence,
Both worldly and transcendent,
Increase and flourish
Effortlessly and spontaneously, we pray.
May we endeavor in spiritual practice and may the holy doctrine flourish.
May we always meditate on you and see your superb face.
Realizing the meaning of emptiness, may the precious intention to awaken
Grow and spread like the waxing moon.
In the excellent and joyous pure land of the victor’s sacred circle,
May we be born in an exquisite, sacred lotus.
Let us actually see Buddha Boundless Light
And receive a clear prophecy of our own enlightenment.
Tārā, swift, peaceful, and glorious, with a blue-green face and two hands,
You are the deity I’ve invoked throughout all my series of lifetimes.
Epitome of all enlightened activities, past, present, and future:
May the auspiciousness of the sacred mother who holds the blue lotus prevail!
May the doctrine,
Sole source of benefit and happiness, long remain.
May the victory banner of the lives
Of those who uphold the doctrine stand firm.
May the gods send timely rains
To produce glorious harvests.
May rulers adhere to the Buddhist doctrine
And may their worldly dominions flourish.
May medicines be potent
And may recitations of mantra be effective.
May non-human worldly beings, such as ḍākinīs and ogres,
Be compassionate.
May humans, whose bodies are better than those of the gods,
Never feel the sufferings of miserable existences
Or undergo hardship:
May they swiftly attain enlightenment!
May all awakened heroes
Accomplish their intention—the welfare of beings.
May all beings
Gain everything these lord protectors intend!
raṃ yaṃ khaṃ
oṃ svabhāva śuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāva śuddho ‘haṃ
Within emptiness, oṃ becomes a jewel vessel, in which the syllables oṃ āḥ hūṃ melt into light and produce inexhaustible mountains of divine substances and sense pleasures.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
namaḥ sarva-buddha-bodhisattvānāṃ apratihata-śāsānāṃ he he bhagavate mahāsattvā sarva-buddhāvalokite māvilambam māvilambam idaṃ baliṅte gṛhṇāpaya gṛhṇāpaya hūṃ hūṃ jaḥ jaḥ sarva-vi-pañcāre svāhā
Noble Tārā, grant me every possible spiritual accomplishment, worldly and transcendent.
Free me from the eight great fears and all other terrors, and pacify all the sufferings of existence, I pray.
oṃ akāro mukhaṃ sarvadharmānām ādyanutpannatvāt oṃ āḥ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
Accept this torma I offer:
Grant us, the adepts,
Health, longevity, power,
Glory, renown, and good fortune.
May we gain great wealth.
Grant us the spiritual accomplishments
Of peaceful, enhancing, and all other activities.
May the protectors honor their promise to watch over us
And accompany us in gaining every spiritual attainment.
Prevent untimely death and illness.
Rid us of demons and hindrances.
Bring an end to nightmares,
Dire omens, and bad actions.
May the world be happy and this year excellent.
May crops and livestock flourish.
Living with magnificence and goodness,
May our wishes be fulfilled.
oṃ akāro mukhaṃ sarvadharmānām ādyanutpannatvāt oṃ āḥ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
I offer this torma to the local spirits who watch over this area.
I ask all local and visiting spirits to honor your promises, guard me, and fulfill my requests as formidable aids and companions.
oṃ namaḥ sarva-tathāgatāvalokite | oṃ sambhara sambhara hūṃ ||
I dedicate this offering to my guests worthy of compassion, the six classes of beings.
May they swiftly gain the state of unsurpassable enlightenment.
I pay homage to Buddha Abundant Jewels.
I pay homage to Buddha Holy Beautiful Form.
I pay homage to Buddha Infinite Body.
I pay homage to Buddha Entirely Fearless.
This is the teaching of the Buddha:
Commit no wrongdoing whatsoever;
Carry out magnificent ennobling acts;
Subdue your own mind completely.
May the momentum of this great generosity
Have all beings become self-arisen buddhas.
May the hosts of beings who weren’t liberated by previous victors
Be liberated by this generosity.
In relation to all the faults committed in this ritual—
Anything I failed to obtain or let go to waste,
And especially, anything I didn’t do—
Lord protectors, I beg your pardon.
In all these cases—when something was missing or in excess,
Any parts of the ritual that proved inadequate,
And anything else I forget—
I ask for your patience.
I implore you to remain here indivisible from these sacred forms
For as long as the round of rebirth endures.
In excellent fashion, grant us health, longevity,
Wealth, and the best of everything.
oṃ supratiṣṭha-vajraye svāhā
Om! You’ve served all beings:
Grant us the corresponding spiritual attainments.
Even though you now depart for your buddha realm,
I pray you may return again.
vajra-muḥ
May these ennobling acts
Lead all beings to complete the twofold cultivation of goodness and wisdom,
And may they attain the two bodies of enlightenment
Whose very source is goodness and wisdom.
May all patrons and their inner circle
Accomplish their aims during this lifetime.
May their obstacles be pacified and auspiciousness prevail.
May their every wish be fulfilled with utmost auspiciousness!
Furthermore, may all misfortune
Be assuaged in our lifetimes.
May we enjoy the excellence
Of a long and healthy life,
And gain lasting happiness.
By the blessings of the attainment of the three bodies of enlightenment,
By the blessings of the unalterable truth of the nature of reality,
And by the blessings of the undivided spiritual community,
May these aspirations be fulfilled just as we’ve dedicated them.
Om! Apparent magnificence, like a mountain of gold,
Lord of the Three Worlds, you have relinquished the three obscurations.
Buddha with eyes like the petals of a blossoming lotus,
You are the first ennobling auspicious fortune of this world.
What you revealed, sublime and tranquil,
Renowned in the three worlds, honored by gods and humans—
The sacred teachings that calm many beings
And the second ennobling auspicious fortune of this world.
The spiritual community, imbued with the sacred teachings, rich with auspicious education,
Recipients of homage from gods, demi-gods, and humans,
Sublime and best assembly, who knows humility, the basis of glory—
The third ennobling auspicious fortune of this world.