Benedictory Verses for White Lotus
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Oṃ svasti.
The embodiment of the activity of the victorious ones of past, present and future
Was the great ācārya of Oḍḍiyāna, whose wisdom mind is invoked
Through the melodious vajra words,
The naturally arisen treasure house of the great secrets. 
To deliver up its contents, the jewels of profound meaning,
One must have the assurance of realization, the full power of wisdom intent,
As a vidyādhara who understands the scriptural collections and the meaning of the tantras.
For this is not within the purview of arrogant intellectuals. 
This treasure mine of the vajra words' hidden meaning
Comes from the one who is without rival and victorious over all,[1]
Mipham Jamyang, the foremost heir
Of the Lake-born Guru, Dorje Ziji.[2] 
With the pure, unobstructed vision of dharmic sight,
And the excellent force of analysis based on threefold validity[3]
He took the key of the White Lotus of excellent explanation
From the casket of the invincible fivefold expanse of clear light. 
Through the virtue of producing this inexhaustible gift of Dharma,
May the environment and inhabitants be perfected as the maṇḍala of the Illusory Web,
And for as long as space itself remains,
May this Dharma never decline but spread everywhere far and wide. 
The benefactor Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö contributed this utterance. Sarva siddhirastu. Maṅgalaṃ.
| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2020.

Bibliography
Tibetan Source
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 10: 571
Secondary Source
Jamgön Mipham. White Lotus: An Explanation of the Seven-Line Prayer to Guru Padmasambhava. Translated by the Padmakara Translation Group. Boston & London: Shambhala Publications, 2007




This verse incorporates the syllables of Mipham's name: Mipham Jamyang Namgyal.  ↩


i.e., Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo.  ↩


i.e., valid perception, inference and scriptural authority.  ↩