A Glorious Garland of Great Bliss—the Fundamental, Female Practice of Tsogyal, the Queen of Great Bliss from the Heart-Essence of the Vast Expanse 1. Taking Refuge 2. Arousing the Bodhicitta of Aspiration and Action 3. Blessing the Offerings 4. The Generation Phase According to Ati 5. Inviting With a Mind Full of Longing 6. Requesting the Deities to Be Seated, and Paying Homage 7. The Offering of Sensory Delights 8. Praise and Aspiration 9. The Recitation that Brings Accomplishment The Concluding Stages: The Feast and Fulfilment Offering Blessing the offerings Inviting and Offering Confession Dedicating the Remainder Offering Invoking the Sacred Pledge Invoking the Covenant Maintaining the Relationship with the Tenma Goddesses The Horse Dance 36 Receiving the Accomplishments Confession of Mistakes Completion Phase Dedication of Merit Aspiration Prayer for Auspiciousness
Namo! Unborn, primordial wisdom 5 is the body of the ḍākinī;
Unceasing, naturally arisen is the yoginī;
Mother of all the buddhas, Vajravārāhī,
In you, beyond union and separation, I take refuge. 6
Hoḥ! From now until I attain awakening,
I will practise you, the wisdom ḍākinī. Once I have accomplished your practice,
I will establish all beings, impartially,
In great bliss.
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ! All thoughts that involve clinging to phenomena as real
Are transformed into clouds of outer, inner and secret offerings.
Just like the sensual delights of Samantabhadra,
They become inexhaustible, like the sky.
sarva-pūja samaya hoḥ
Āḥ! All appearances are the expanse of the five mothers.
All that exists is the circle of ḍākinīs.
The palace is beyond cause and condition.
The single entrance symbolises the single sphere 7 of all-pervading space.
In the centre of the palace blazing with great bliss,
Upon the heart of a blossoming lotus
And a sun-disc seat, stands the foremost of the ḍākinīs:
In the expanse of dharmakāya she is Samantabhadrī.
In the sambhogakāya realm she is Vajravārāhī,
And in the nirmāṇakāya form she is Yeshe Tsogyal.
She has one face and two hands; her body is red in colour.
She is naked, standing in the posture of equanimity, yet ready to act.
Passionate and smiling,
She holds in her right hand a small skull-drum, 8
Which she plays at the level of her ear.
In her left hand she holds a hooked knife, the handle
Resting on her hip; her bearing is imposing and graceful.
Her bhaga is expanded and her breasts swell.
She is adorned with jewels and youthful ornaments
And wears a garland of white lotus flowers. 9
The six bone ornaments adorn her body, 10
Her black, glistening hair is plaited,
And her jewelled diadem shines majestically.
Her central eye gazes into all-encompassing space.
Her sambhogakāya eye tames beings.
Her nirmāṇakāya eye summons the three realms.
In her body the maṇḍalas of all the classes of tantra are perfectly complete.
At her heart, the expanse of the glorious knot, 11
Are the unfabricated, naturally arisen, completely perfect deities.
At the centre of a five-spoked wheel
Is the pure nature of the all-ground consciousness, mind and phenomena:
The all-pervading awareness is Samantabhadra.
In union with his consort Samantabhadrī, they are appearance and emptiness indivisible.
On the five spokes are the deities of pure form, feeling, perception,
Formation and consciousness:
Vairocana, Ratnasambhava, Amitābha,
Amoghasiddhi and Vajrākṣobhya.
They embrace the pure forms of earth, Locana; water, Māmakī;
Fire, Pāṇḍarāvasinī; air, Samayatārā; and
Space, Dhātvīśvarī—
The consorts of the five families.
On the right side, in the four channels of the sense faculties
Are the four inner bodhisattvas of the pure consciousnesses,
Who embrace the female bodhisattvas of the four pure objects.
At the eye are Kṣitigarbha and Lāsyā,
At the ear, Vajrapāṇi and Gītā,
At the nose, Ākāśagarbha and Mālā,
And at the tongue, Avalokiteśvara and Nṛtyā.
On the left side, in the four channels of the sense faculties
Are the four outer bodhisattvas of the pure sense faculties.
They embrace the female bodhisattvas of the four pure times.
At the eye are Maitreya and Dhūpā,
At the ear, Nīvaraṇaviṣkambhin and Puṣpā,
At the nose, Samantabhadra and Ālokā,
And at the tongue, Mañjuśrī and Gandhā.
At the forehead, tongue, heart,
Navel, secret place, and on the sole of the left foot
Are the pure nature of the views of the six realms and the five afflictions,
Together with miserliness—
They are the learned beings, the six munis.
At the four limbs are
The natural purity of the body's consciousness,
Sense faculty, objects of touch and tactile cognition—
The four male doorkeepers.
They embrace the purity of the views of eternalism, nihilism, self,
And the view of characteristics—the female doorkeepers.
On the right hand are Yama and Aṅkuśā,
On the left hand, Mahābala and Pāśā,
On the left foot, Hayagrīva and Śriṅkhalā,
And on the right foot, Amṛtakuṇḍalī and Ghaṇtā.
They carry out the enlightened activity of the four immeasurables.
Thus by completing the purification of the objects to be purified,
The consummate deities of the three seats of completeness 12
Appear, vivid yet empty.
Within the pores of her body
The heruka-maṇḍalas of all classes of tantra
Are wholly and completely perfected, without exception.
All their manifestations in different colours,
Their various implements and forms,
Are the great illusion that originates from itself and arises naturally.
She is surrounded by a vast assembly of hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs.
The lord of the families is Mighty Lotus with Skull-Garland. 13
The youthful ācārya has a light complexion and is smiling.
He appears in the form of a heruka and plays a small skull-drum and bell.
The samaya and wisdom deities are indivisible.
Merely by meditating on them I gain accomplishment.
Hūṃ! In the country known as India,
Lie the supremely sacred land of Uḍḍiyāna
And Dhumathala, its citadel of ḍākinīs,
And also Cāmaradvīpa, the supreme island among islands.
In reality they are the Unsurpassed, 14 pure realm of great bliss,
Yet they appear as emanated celestial realms.
From all those places where you joyfully reside,
Great dharmakāya mother Tsogyal,
Together with your retinue of hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs,
Come! Inspire me with your blessings—
Shower down your blessings on this supreme place!
Grant me, a supreme practitioner, the four empowerments!
Remove any obstacle-makers, misleading guides and hindrances!
Grant me the supreme and ordinary accomplishments!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-jñāna-ḍākiṇi e a ra li pheṃ pheṃ jaḥ
Hoḥ! From the very beginning, the samaya and wisdom deity
Are indivisible, like the vajra seat.
To the ḍākinī, the miraculous manifestation of mind,
And innate, primordial wisdom, I pay homage!
namo nama hūṃ
Hoḥ! All phenomena of appearance and existence
Arise as the ornaments of the five sensory delights.
This great wish-fulfilling treasure of the mind,
A delightful offering beyond accepting or rejecting, I offer!
vajra-jñāna-dākiṇi puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda mahāmudre rakta pañca baliṅ te sarvapūjā āḥ hūṃ
Hūṃ! Vajrayoginī, mother of all buddhas,
Viśvamātā, Prajñāpāramitā,
Mother Tsogyal—joyful, passionate and smiling—
Buddha Padmasambhava’s consort, to you I pay homage!
Your body is ravishing and youthful, and adorned with the major and minor marks.
Your speech, ceaseless and symbolic, liberates upon hearing.
Your mind evokes the primordial wisdom of bliss and emptiness through mere recollection.
Queen of the ḍākinīs, princess of Kharchen, 15 to you I pay homage!
Most excellent consort who grants the sixteen joys,
By concentrating on your illusory yet clear appearance,
May the outer, inner and other, and the elements of channels, wind-energies and essences,
Be purified into the expanse of Samantabhadrī.
I am the ḍākinī. In my heart
Is Vārāhī, dark blue in colour and holding a hooked knife and skull-cup.
In her heart is a coil of joy, in the centre of which is the syllable vaṃ,
Encircled by the mantra garland; it revolves, emitting light rays that
Illuminate and enhance the appearance of the deities;
It invokes the wisdom mind of the guru, the lord of the families,
Who sends out rays of light that accomplish the twofold benefit.
From the guru’s body, a stream of ambrosia,
Undefiled great bliss, flows down.
Through the power of the four joys,
The primordial wisdom of the four empowerments is experienced.
oṃ padmo-yoginī-jñāna-vārāhī hūṃ
oṃ guhya-jñāna bodhicitta-mahāsukha rulu rulu hūṃ bhyo hūṃ
Hoḥ! In the wondrous vessel of great bliss
Are arranged the delights of the feast-offering,
The samaya substances that are free from accepting and rejecting.
With oṃ āḥ hūṃ they are transformed into ambrosia.
Hūṃ! The Unsurpassed and the other celestial realms,
The sacred places where the heroic ones 16 and ḍākinīs gather,
The twenty-four emanated places, 17
Are inwardly the cities of our vajra body.
The crown of the head is Jālandhara, 19
The point between the eyebrows is Pullīramalaya, 20
The channels and elements at the back of the neck are Arbuda,
The ūrṇā 21 is Rāmeśvara,
The right ear is the land of Uḍḍiyāna,
The left is the realm of Godāvarī,
The two eyes are Devīkoṭa,
And the shoulders are Mālava. You who dwell in these eight places—
Heroic ones and yoginīs,
Ḍākas and ḍākinīs—
Come and enjoy this feast-offering!
Your top-knots swaying,
Your long tresses swinging to and fro,
Your earrings, anklets and armlets jingling,
Your bone ornaments rattling, your tiny bells ringing,
With small skull-drums and bells resounding,
Take pleasure in our vajra songs and dances!
We offer you the enjoyment of these sensory delights as the feast!
We confess our impairments of samaya!
Liberate outer and inner obstacles into all-encompassing space!
Grant us the supreme and common accomplishments!
The wheel of enjoyment 23 is Lampāka,
The armpits and kidneys are Kāmarūpa,
The two breasts are Oḍra,
The navel is Triśakuni,
The tip of the nose is Kośala,
The palate 24 is the land of Kaliṅga,
And the heart is Kāñcī,
And Himālaya. 25 You who dwell in these eight places—
Heroic ones and yoginīs,
Ḍākas and ḍākinīs—
Come and enjoy this feast-offering!
Your top-knots swaying,
Your long tresses swinging to and fro,
Your earrings, anklets and armlets jingling,
Your bone ornaments rattling, your tiny bells ringing,
Small skull-drums and bells resounding,
Take pleasure in our vajra songs and dances!
We offer you the enjoyment of these sensory delights as the feast!
We confess our impairments of samaya!
Liberate outer and inner obstacles into all-encompassing space!
Grant us the supreme and common accomplishments!
The genitals are the land of Pretapurī,
The anus is the land of Gṛhadevatā, 27
The big toes are Maru and the thighs are Saurāṣṭra,
The calves are Suvarṇadvīpa,
The sixteen fingers and toes are Nagara, 28
The knees are Kulatā,
And the ankles are Sindhu. You who dwell in these eight places—
Heroic ones and yoginīs,
Ḍākas and ḍākinīs—
Come and enjoy this feast-offering!
Your top-knots swaying,
Your long tresses swinging to and fro,
Your earrings, anklets and armlets jingling,
Your bone ornaments rattling, your tiny bells ringing,
With small skull-drums and bells resounding,
Take pleasure in our vajra songs and dances!
We offer you the enjoyment of these sensory delights as the feast!
We confess our impairments of samaya!
Liberate outer and inner obstacles into all-encompassing space!
Grant us the supreme and common accomplishments!
Hoḥ! Assembly of wisdom ḍākinīs, turn your attention towards me!
Under the sway of attachment, aversion and ignorance,
I have committed misdeeds of body, speech and mind, which I openly acknowledge and confess.
Under the influence of the lower vehicle,
I have not realized the authentic truth, which I openly admit and confess.
Since I have little compassion and have fallen under the control of anger,
I have failed to act for the benefit of beings, which I openly admit and confess.
Under the influence of laziness and sleep,
I have strayed from meditation and practice, which I openly admit and confess.
Under the influence of miserliness and stinginess,
I have failed to make monthly or annual offerings, which I openly admit and confess.
Under the influence of pride and arrogance,
I have gone against my guru’s body, speech and mind, which I openly admit and confess.
Lacking love and affection,
I have annoyed my friends and spiritual brothers and sisters, which I openly admit and confess.
Having fallen under the influence of bad companions,
I have spoiled the first portion and turned it into the remainder, which I openly admit and confess.
Through the fault of degrading the first portion and turning it into the remainder,
I have displeased those who relish the first portion, which I openly admit and confess.
Having displeased those who relish the first portion,
I have incurred the harsh retribution commanded by the ḍākinīs, which I openly admit and confess.
When performing the liberation, owing to my meagre compassion,
I lacked the strength to deliver beings to a better place, which I openly admit and confess.
Having failed to liberate the afflictions,
I have turned them into long-lasting obscurations, which I openly admit and confess.
During the practice of union, since my meditative concentration lacked strength,
I have displeased my consort, which I openly admit and confess.
Having displeased the consort,
I have developed attachment and the cause for rebirth in saṃsāra, which I openly admit and confess.
Now that I have confessed, please grant the accomplishments of enlightened body, speech and mind!
oṃ ākāro mukhaṃ sarvadharmānām ādyanutpannatvāt oṃ āḥ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
Peṃ! All you attendants who share in the remainder and carry out the commands:
The thirty-two ḍākinīs,
The great kiṃkara with consorts and laṅkā spirits in your hundreds of thousands,
The three hundred sixty classes of messengers,
The Four Swift Ones and Eight Blazing Ones,
Seven Mātṛkās and Four Sisters,
The forceful, roaming and therianthropic spirits— 30
You who crave leftovers and roam the assembly halls,
Please accept this excellent remainder!
Dispel all unfavourable, negative circumstances and obstacles!
Accomplish the activities entrusted to you, this is our request!
Hūṃ! Rise up, all you deities of the ḍākinī assembly!
Out of all-pervading space, arise in bodies of form!
Crush any obstacles to our accomplishment of awakening!
Halt the degeneration of the elements in the environment and beings!
Heal any weakness in our channels, wind-energies and authentic presence! 31
Cause our practice to bear fruition!
Hūṃ! During the eternal excellence beyond the three times,
In the self-appearing pure realm of The Unsurpassed,
You, the teacher and retinue of the three seats of completeness,
Turned the wheel of the extremely secret, indestructible Dharma.
The three realms of the gods who are free from clinging to phenomena as real 32
Are proclaimed as the places from where the classes of tantra originate.
In the perception of fortunate, emanated beings, the teachings of mantra
Appear naturally. On one such occasion,
At Tsogyal Latso lake near Dragda, 33
The mind of the glorious Rangjung Dorje 34
Was blessed by the ḍākinīs of the three places.
With neither attachment nor grasping, he deciphered the symbolic script
And revealed this inexhaustible treasure. Immediately,
Delusions were purified in the ground.
In keeping with these auspicious circumstances, carry out the activities!
Hūṃ! You, attendants who obey the command of the Glorious One and protect the realm of Tibet,
Mātṛkās and sisters—Twelve Tenma Goddesses, 35
Come and accept the torma’s cleansing water,
And carry out the activities we request of you!
ma ma hriṃ hriṃ baliṅ te khāhi
Hūṃ! In this maṇḍala of the wisdom ḍākinī,
All spirits who cause us to break our samaya and lead us astray 37
Are suppressed, buried beneath the seal of the nine yānas.
Let them never rise again!
sthaṃ bha ya nen
Hoḥ! Right now, this very morning, the samayas of the ḍākinī practice have been fulfilled!
Now the time has come to grant us the accomplishments!
From the maṇḍala of the non-abiding, primordial wisdom,
Grant us the union with your enlightened body, speech and mind, and the ten powers and strengths—
Now, this very instant!
oṃ padmo-yoginī-jñāna-vārāhi vajra-kāya-vākka-citta-sarva-siddhi-phala hoḥ
Hūṃ! In the maṇḍala of the wisdom ḍākinī,
If our offerings were not complete, or our practice was inattentive,
Our meditation drowsy, dull and lifeless,
Forgive all such confusion and mistakes, I pray!
oṃ vajrasatvasamayam anupālaya vajrasatva tvenopatiṣṭha ḍṛḍho me bhava sutoṣyo me bhava supoṣyo me bhava anurakto me bhava sarvasiddhiṃ me prayaccha sarvakarmasu ca me cittaṃ śreyaḥ kuru hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ bhagavan sarvatathāgatavajra mā me muñca vajrī bhava mahāsamayasattva āḥ
Hoḥ! Like bubbles appearing on water,
The deities of the maṇḍala, created by myself,
Dissolve into the all-pervading space of primordial wisdom— vajra muḥ !
In the post-meditation, everything arises as the illusory body of the deity.
Hoḥ! In the maṇḍala of the wisdom ḍākinī,
By practising the generation and completion phases and recitations,
Whatever sources of merit I have
I dedicate to the enlightenment of all beings!
Hoḥ! All that appears and exists is the celestial realm and
Vajrayoginī, unchanging great bliss.
Vajravārāhī, truly blessed with the most sublime of qualities,
May we see your true face and attain enlightenment!
oṃ ye dharmā hetu prabhavā hetun teṣāṃ tathāgato hy avadat teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃ vādī mahāśramaṇaḥ svāhā
Hoḥ! Through the blessing of the lineage of the vidyādharas,
And through the truth of the Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha,
And through the auspicious interdependence of the profound Secret Mantrayāna:
May all be auspicious, to pacify the eight fears!
May all be auspicious, for developing life and merit!
May all be auspicious, to bring perception under our control!
May all be auspicious, to annihilate negative, misleading forces!
With all attachment to perception transformed and perfected as the form of the deity,
All sound purified into the great bliss of mantra,
All thoughts matured into the luminosity of dharmakāya—
May all be auspicious, so that we attain the translucent rainbow body!