The Swift Infusion of Blessings A Prayer to the Guru
Having seen the luxuries of saṃsāra as akin to a nest of vipers,
You sincerely turned away from compulsive attachment
To the affairs of the present life, and became a renunciant—
Tsokdruk Rangdrol, at your feet I pray.
May the stream of nectarous explanations of the profound path
That flows from the excellent crystal vase of your wisdom heart
Wash away all the afflictions that sully the jewel of my mind
And bring about the fulfilment of all wishes for twofold benefit.
You, the one who clearly understands all that is knowable,
And who, with loving kindness and compassion,
Teaches the Dharma, profound and vast, authentic root guru,
May your life remain secure for a hundred aeons!
A handsome form of signs and marks born of twofold accumulation,
Sweetly melodious speech resonant with the sixty wondrous qualities,
And a non-grasping mind, empty clarity, in which kleśa s liberate themselves—
To the guru’s enlightened body, speech and mind, I pray.
May my body be infused with the blessings of the guru’s form,
May physical obscurations be purified and blissful warmth ignite,
May my body become a deathless rainbow form, a kāya of light,
And may I physically become a source of benefit to others.
May my speech be infused with the blessings of the guru’s speech,
May vocal obscurations be purified and my power increase,
May my voice become the unceasing melodious voice of Brahmā,
And may I vocally become a source of benefit to others.
May my mind be infused with the blessings of the guru’s mind,
May mental obscurations be purified and experience and realization unfold,
May my mind become the dharmakāya beyond delusion,
And may I mentally become a source of benefit to others.
Guru Vajradhara, embodiment of the entire threefold refuge,
Assuming the form of spiritual guides who trains according to what is needed—
Those who confer the attainments, ordinary and supreme,
Gracious gurus, to you I pray.
In all my lives, may I never be separated from genuine guru,
May I enjoy the splendour of the Dharma,
And by perfecting the qualities of the paths and stages,
May I swiftly attain the level of Vajradhara!
That I have encountered the teachings of the unsurpassable Teacher
In this way is due to the guru’s kindness.
I therefore dedicate all my virtue, so that each and every being
May be accepted and cared for by such a noble spiritual guide.
Towards the lifestyle and activity of the guru,
May wrong view not arise for even an instant, and
May I regard whatever is done as a teaching for me.
Through such devotion, may the guru’s blessing inspire and fill my mind!