Bestower of Supreme Blessings A Prayer to the Supreme All-Knowing Emanation
One and only father of the victors of the three times, Mañjughoṣa,
In order to share a festival of Dharma, profound and vast,
You assumed the form of a supreme spiritual guide of peerless intellect—
Sovereign guru, I pray that your life may remain secure.
On the stable pole of the rules of well-spoken Vinaya,
Flutters the silken flag of the two types of bodhicitta,
With the jewel of great secret ripening and liberating at its crest—
To this supreme victory banner of the fully observed teaching, I bow.
Your mindstream is enriched by a wealth of prodigious study,
Your misconceptions eliminated through contemplation of meaning—
To you, whose body of realization is strengthened through the nectar
Of single-pointed meditative absorption, I bow.
You have the eyes of the twofold wisdom of omniscience,
You guide and care for beings with loving compassion
And your power is the splendour of scripture and realization—
Incomparable and noble guru, at your feet I bow.
The elegance of your exposition is a splendour to the fortunate,
The rationality of your debate destroys opponents with wrong views,
And your garlanded compositions are ornaments to beautify the victor’s teachings—
Superlative master of expression, at your feet I bow.
With non-referential love, you constantly watch over disciples
Of this snowy land of Tibet at this degenerate time,
And with the limitless beneficence of the four means of attraction
You extend the celebration of benefit and happiness—at your feet I bow.
Through the power of praying with one-pointed devotion in this way,
May the Sage’s flawless teachings spread throughout the ten directions,
May the lives of the sublime masters who uphold the teachings remain secure,
And may utterly pure enlightened actions flourish.
Throughout every land may the evil signs of this degenerate age,
Such as disease, famine and warfare, be wholly pacified,
And, as all beings revel in the glory of the ten virtues,
May we savour the splendours of a new golden era.
For us, in particular, from now until awakening,
May you guide and care for us inseparably, O protector.
May we complete the stages of study, contemplation and meditation,
And swiftly attain the stage of all-encompassing insight.