Yearning for Mountain Solitude[1]
by Patrul Rinpoche
Having seen the bewildering scope of never-ending activities,
All so unnecessary and frivolous,
Within delusory perception of this world, this city of saṃsāra,
Abu's attention turns to the solitude of the mountains.[2] 
Having seen the constant frenzy of actitvity,
The futile clamour of busyness and distraction
In the dealings of the monastic community,
Abu's attention turns to the solitude of the mountains. 
Anyone I look at is inexorably approaching death;
Anything I consider involves a denial of mortality.
Having seen such disenchanting extravagance,
Abu's attention turns to the solitude of the mountains. 
Any friends I make increase my attachment and aversion;
Any form of interaction involves dishonesty and deception.
Having seen how companions lack the conditions for virtue,
Abu's attention turns to the solitude of the mountains. 
Throughout the three realms, the hostile kleśas go on deceiving;
Among the six classes, the wheel of distraction continues to turn.
Having seen these means of engendering further suffering,
Abu's attention turns to the solitude of the mountains. 
O Guru, unfailing protector, and Three Jewels,
When I reach a place of retreat, inspire me with the fortitude to remain there.
Grant your blessings and enable me to settle in the solitude of the mountains,
Somewhere that provides physical and vocal isolation,
And thereby inspire a true solitude of the mind. 

| Translated by Ane Tsöndrü and Adam Pearcey, 2020.

Bibliography
Tibetan Source
O rgyan 'jigs med chos kyi dbang po. "'du 'dzi spang nas dben par bskul ba'i gdams pa/ 'jig rten 'khrul snang sogs/" in gsung 'bum/_o rgyan 'jigs med chos kyi dbang po. TBRC W21857. 6 vols. gangtok: sonam topgay kazi, 1970-1971.Vol. 6: 93–94
_____ . "'du 'dzi spang nas dben par bskul ba'i gdams pa/ 'jig rten 'khrul snang sogs/" in gsung 'bum/_o rgyan 'jigs med chos kyi dbang po. TBRC W5832. 5 vols. null: null, null. Vol. 5: 873–874
Secondary Sources
Gayley, Holly and Joshua Schapiro (eds.). A Gathering of Brilliant Moons: Practice Advice from the Rimé Masters of Tibet. Somerville, MA: Wisdom Publications. 2017.
Pearcey, Adam. 2017. ‘All About Abu’. Adam S. Pearcey (blog). 3 November 2017. https://adamspearcey.com/2017/11/03/all-about-abu/.
Ricard, Matthieu. 2017. Enlightened Vagabond: The Life and Teachings of Patrul Rinpoche. Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications.

Version: 1.3-20230417




The original text is untitled. Editors of Patrul Rinpoche's collected writings have provided the title "'du 'dzi spang nas dben par bskul ba'i gdams pa/", which might be translated as "Exhortatory Advice to Abandon Busyness and Seek Isolation." We have opted for a slightly more evocative title in English.  ↩


On the meaning of Abu see Pearcey 2017.  ↩