The Dhāraṇīs That Encapsulate the Essence of the Kangyur, the Collected Words of the Buddha
In Sanskrit: śatasāhasrikā-prajñāpāramitā-garbha
In Tibetan: sherap kyi parol tu chinpa tongtrak gyapé nyingpo
In English: The Heart Essence of the Prajñāpāramitā in One Hundred Thousand Verses
Homage to the condensed heart essence of the Blessed Prajñāpāramitā!
tadyathā | oṃ mune mune mahā-mune dharma-śāka hā | dharme śāse niri sarva-kārya saritra me dharmā | tadyathā | hri su hri smṛti | jaya vijaya | dhīḥ dhāraṇī-prajñāsāre svāhā ||
In Sanskrit: Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrika-prajñāpāramitā-garbha
In Tibetan: sherap kyi parol tu chinpa tongtrak nyishu ngapé nyingpo
In English: The Heart Essence of the Prajñāpāramitā in Twenty-Five Thousand Verses
Homage to the heart essence of the Blessed Prajñāpāramitā in Twenty-Five Thousand Verses!
tadyathā | oṃ prajñe prajñe mahā-prajñe sarva-bhare | prajñā sarva-jñāna duntare prajñā preta | su-kare su-kare sukara siddhi | buddha buddha | kampa kampa | sara sara | dhara dhara | vara vara | garja garja | garjayati svāhā ||
In Sanskrit: āryāṣṭa-sāhasrika-prajñāpāramitā-garbha
In Tibetan: sherap kyi parol tu chinpa gyé tongpé nyingpo
In English: The Noble Heart Essence of the Prajñāpāramitā in Eight Thousand Verses
Homage to the Blessed Prajñāpāramitā!
tadyathā | oṃ hri śrute smṛte jaye vijaye svāhā ||
In Sanskrit: aṣṭāyuta-sahasrika-prajñāpāramitā-dhāraṇī
In Tibetan: sherap kyi parol tu chinpa trigyé tongpé zung
In English: The Dhāraṇī for the Prajñāpāramitā in Eighteen Thousand Verses
oṃ mune mune mahāmunaye svāhā | prajñāpāramitāye svāhā ||
In Sanskrit: sarva-tathāgata-hṛdaya nāma
In Tibetan: deshyin shekpa tamché kyi nyingpo
In English: The Heart Essence of All the Tathāgatas
Homage to the Three Jewels!
sarva-tathāgata-hṛdayānu-gate oṃ ku ruṃ gi ni svāhā ||
In Sanskrit: ārya-prajñāpāramitā-sañcaya-gāthā-garbha
In Tibetan: phakpa sherab kyi parol tu chinpa düpa tsik su chepé nyingpo
In English: The Heart Essence of the Condensed Noble Prajñāpāramitā in a Single Line
Homage to Noble Mañjuśrī!
tadyathā | oṃ gate gate pāragate pāragate saṃgate bodhiye svāhā ||
In Sanskrit: ārya-mañjuśrī-tantra-garbha
In Tibetan: phakpa jampal gyi gyü kyi yang nying
In English: The Quintessence of the Noble Mañjuśrī Tantra
Homage to Mañjuśrī the Youthful!
In this way, to the Awakened One, the transcendent Lord,
The wisdom kāya, spontaneously arisen,
The single eye of wisdom, entirely unobscured,
The light of wisdom, forever shining brightly,
arapacanāya te namaḥ ||
To you, the very embodiment of wisdom, I bow.
Thus it is explained by all the perfect buddhas.
In Sanskrit: bhagavatī-prajñāpāramitā-hṛdaya
In Tibetan: chomdendema sherap kyi parol tu chinmé nyingpo
In English: The Blessed Heart Essence of the Prajñāpāramitā
Homage to the Blessed Prajñāpāramitā!
It is like this:
a
In Sanskrit: upari-śuddha-nāma-dhāraṇī
In Tibetan: yön yong su jongwa shé chawé zung
In English: The Dhāraṇī of the Complete Purification of Offerings
namaḥ samanta-bhadrāya bodhi-sattvāya mahā-sattvāya mahā-karuṇīkāya | tadyathā | oṃ namo bhara bhara sattvāya svāhā ||
Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the complete and perfect Buddha, Bright Flaming King of Dazzling Jewels!
Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the complete and perfect Buddha, Jewel Flower, Strength of Power.
Homage the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the complete and perfect Buddha, Moonlight Sublime Refuge, Conqueror of Foes.
Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the complete and perfect Buddha, Most Firm and Tame Vajra, Vanquisher of Opposing Forces.
Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the complete and perfect Buddha, Equal to the Number of Stacked Grains of Sand in One Hundred Million Ganga Rivers.
Homage to the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the complete and perfect Buddha, Vajra Conqueror.