Lament Composed in a State of Deep Sadness
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Father guru, Vajradhara Loter Wangpo, care for me.
Look upon me, the evil one, right now with compassion.
This son of yours is contaminated with delusion and negative thoughts,
And cannot meet you in your wisdom form.
He cannot even so much as look upon your face,
O protector, in his dreams.
Lord, my deep faith and devotion for you
Is sincere and from the heart. 
Still, although this is not mere lip service but deeply felt,
Lord, you do not show your face and I cannot hear your voice,
As if my mind were devoid of deep devotion. 
I have had many human gurus,
But five were greatest in their kindness.[1]
Of these the sole adornment on my crown
Is none other than you, my father guru. 
When I recall your life of liberation, O lord,
I cannot but succumb to tears.
When I utter your name faith overwhelms me.
Considering this, look upon me with compassion.
Do not abandon this pupil of yours to his evil karma.
Any transgressions of the samayas of the lord’s three secrets,
I continually confess with heartfelt remorse.
Grant me the gift of perfect purity, I pray.
Continuously, I visualise you at the centre of my heart
And offer single-pointed prayers.
Inspire me with your blessings.
Induce the great power of experience and realization, I pray.
As the fourfold maṇḍala support dissolves in four stages,
May I attain mastery of the glorious kāyas.
Noble father, mighty Vajradhara, care for me.
Bless me so that I never part from you, my lord. 
Thus, on the twenty-eight day of the Puṣya [i.e., twelfth] month of the Earth Mouse year,[2] I wrote this lament while in a state of deep sadness.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2019 with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust.

Bibliography
Tibetan Edition
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "rgyal zla'i tshes nyer brgyad nyin snang ba skyo mun ne ba'i ngang bris pa'i gdung dbyangs/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 8: 480–481

Version: 1.4-20230130




According to Orgyen Tobgyal Rinpoche, the five were Loter Wangpo, Katok Situ, Shechen Gyaltsab, Dodrupchen Jigme Tenpai Nyima and Tertön Sogyal.  ↩


i.e.,1948/49. The twelfth month would have fallen in 1949.  ↩