Wisdom’s Bestowal A Way to Accumulate the Recitation of the Tantra Chanting the Names of Mañjuśrī, Mañjuśrī Nāmasaṅgīti I. Recitation as a Praise to Mañjuśrī's Formidable Qualities II. Recitation as Secret Mantra by Uniting with Mañjuśrī's Nature III. Recitation as Secret Mantra by Maintaining One's Yidam Vajra Pride IV. Recitation Abiding by Selflessness Colophon
Namo Guru Jñānakāyāya
Until enlightenment I take refuge
In the Lama, Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha.
To achieve perfect awakening for others,
I shall recite this profound tantra.
Ārya Jetsün Mañjuśrī
Appears instantly in the sky before me,
Seated upon a lotus and moon
Set amidst cloud-banks of ravishing offerings.
He shines as brilliant as a mountain of gold
Rising above the whitest of clouds,
And with a gentle smile, he is the very epitome of youth,
A sixteen year old blazing with all the major and minor marks.
He has one face and four hands. His first pair of hands
Holds a sword of wisdom and a book,
While the remaining pair
Holds the bow of method and the arrow of wisdom.
Seated in the lotus posture, he rests his back against a moon.
He wears a skirt of various silks
Adorned with the finest jewels.
His hair, braided with utpala flowers, is tied up upon his crown,
Where the lord of the family Akṣobhya abides.
This empty yet apparent kāya of wisdom
Appears clear and vivid –
Like a rainbow in the sky.
O wonder! Mañjuśrī, you find no equivalent
In the appearance of saṃsāra and of nirvāṇa,
Amongst buddhas, bodhisattvas,
Śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas,
Nor are Brahma and Indra – the greatest of the gods – your equal!
Therefore, the names and kāyas that you display
In accordance with the infinite array of knowables,
As well as your qualities, cannot be contained within the vastness of the sky;
They fill my mind with the greatest, incontrovertible devotion.
So with a voice that resounds with the gentle beauty of a tamboura,
I sing the adamantine names of the embodiment of pure wisdom.
When the liturgy of your adamantine names is set to melody,
The qualities of your knowledge, love, and power are invoked,
Causing compassion’s brilliance
To illuminate the threefold world in all its entirety.
This recitation banishes the darkness of the twofold obscurations
And eliminates the negativity and downfalls
Gathered by both myself and all others since time without beginning.
It causes the lotus blossom of supreme mind to bloom,
Awakening the two knowledges of nature and phenomena in their multiplicity.
Samantabhadra's oceanic clouds of the finest of offerings,
Both actually laid out and mentally conjured,
Are arranged to fill the whole of existence—
May they please you, ever-youthful Mañjuśrī!
oṃ ārya mañjuśrī arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda pratīccha svāhā
Homage to you, Mañjuśrī,
Sole embodiment of the wisdom
Of all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
You bring glory and splendour to all of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa.
Protector, with the perfect recitation
Of your adamantine names I shall praise you fully—
From this moment onward, until my awakening,
Please hold me in your care with joy.
Mañjuśrī, sun of speech,
Bless me so that, in the short term,
The wisdoms of study, contemplation, and meditation will blossom fully,
And I may teach, debate, and compose without equal.
Ultimately, may I achieve the wisdom kāya
That knows all percepts and things,
To lead all beings
To the supreme state of the ever-youthful Mañjuśrī.
Mañjuśrī, you are ever free from elaboration,
But in the illusory forms of dependent arising
You burst forth as the embodiment of wisdom,
Which returns to the natural dharmadhātu.
By the power of all possible merit
I have created through this practice,
May all beings
Come to enjoy the wisdom of the Sugatas.
oṃ svabhāva śuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāva śuddho ‘haṃ
Upon a moon mandala at my heart
Appears the symbol of the unborn, a white A.
The vajra sound of the tantra
Arises like an echo in dependence upon this syllable
Without fixation on characteristics such as arising or ceasing, and
Mindful of the kāya of wisdom
Beyond the duality of profound purity and clear light,
I will read the tantra.
By the power of all possible merit
I have created through this practice,
May all beings
Come to enjoy the wisdom of the Sugatas.
Oṃ Svasti
Chanting the laden names of Mañjuśrī, the embodiment of the wisdom of the Victor and his heirs,
Is the essence of the ocean of tantras manifesting in excellent words; through the merit of printing them,
May the life of every holder of the teachings be long, the teachings spread and flourish, the benefactors of the four categories see their wealth increase,
And all wandering beings rejoice in the feast of happiness and well-being, be ever youthful and swiftly attain omniscience.