Shower of Wisdom Blessings: A Song
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Ahoye!
Amidst an expanse of self-arisen, five-coloured rainbow light
Resides my only father, the immensely gracious Tsokyé Dorje.
Let fall a gentle shower of blessings upon this child of yours;
Cause my concepts to dissolve, unimpeded, into the unborn. 
Retinue hosts of ḍākinīs and vīras in their hundreds of thousands
Gracefully dance amidst a throng of parasols and victory banners;
The whole of space abounds with divine silks and fresh flowers,
As music to accompany myriad songs of auspiciousness plays. 
Above are the learned and accomplished vidyādharas of India and Tibet;
In the middle, hosts of peaceful and wrathful deities, of the nine sādhanas and so on;
Below, the oath-bound dharma guardians are amassed like clouds,
Eager to act and liberate samaya-breakers, enemies and obstructors. 
Around them are oceans of wealth deities, who supply a treasure of attainments,
And wholesome gods and nāgas wearing expressions of delight.
Through the repeated display of this illusory marvel,
The mind of this yogin, a child of illusion, is made merry. 
Aho!
Lake-born Vajra of Oḍḍiyāna, embodiment of all sources of refuge,
Mandāravā, queen of space, and Yeshe Tsogyal, lady of great bliss,
Remain together inseparably, I pray, as an adornment upon my crown,
Beyond union and separation, and grant your blessings! 
Through constantly offering the blossoming lotus at the core of my heart,
May I seize the stronghold of realization in which wisdom and mind are inseparable,
Traverse the secret path of the four stages of vidyādhara,
Become the equal of the Lord of Oḍḍiyāna within the wisdom expanse
And receive the siddhi of emptying saṃsāra from its very depths. 
The vidyādhara Kunzang Ösel Nyingpo Tsal wrote this in Gangtok, Sikkim, on the 19th day of the second month in the Earth Dog year.[1]

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2023.

Bibliography
Tibetan Edition
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "glu ye shes byin 'bebs/" In 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. (W1KG12986) Vol. 8: 447–448

Version: 1.0-20230109




Corresponding to 7 April 1958.  ↩