A Section of the Vajrakīla Root Tantra
In the language of India: Vajrakīlaya-mūla-tantra-khaṇḍa
In the language of Tibet: Dorjé phurba tsawé gyükyi dumbu (rdo rje phur pa rtsa ba’i rgyud kyi dum bu)
In the English language: A Section of the Vajrakīla Root Tantra
Homage to the Blessed Vajrakumāra!
Vajra wrath cuts through aggression.
The great blue weapon blazes forth
To dawn, like a drop, in the maṇḍala of the sky.
It becomes the gateway to the life force,
Visualized in the center of the heart.
The samaya of compassionately liberating
Involves neither killing nor subduing.
The aggregates and consciousness are
Transformed into vajra, their true nature.
oṃ vajra-kīli kīlaya sarva-vighnān baṃ hūṃ phaṭ | dīpta-cakra hana hana hūṃ phaṭ | 1
Vidyādharas of Vajrakumāra,
Actualize saṃsāra as vajra!
Let saṃsāra become the deities of Vajrakīla
And actualize the wisdom wrath!
The wisdom forms of all the buddhas,
Are, in their very nature of vajra suchness,
The essence of the dharmadhātu,
The embodiment of unbearable, blazing wrath.
I assume the treasury of your form.
With skillful means and beings’ benefit in sight,
Bring to completion the buddha’s awakened activities
For those to be tamed by loving kindness and compassion.
Bestow your blessings and confer empowerment.
oṃ vajra-krodha-hūṃkāra hūṃ garja garja hūṃ phaṭ | oṃ vajra-krodhī-dīpayati hūṃ | oṃ vajra-sūkara-mukha hūṃ | oṃ vajreṣupa-mukhi hūṃ |
These are the mantras for the great wrathful king Hūṃkāra, the vajra queen Dīpayatī, and the emanated deities, the pig- and lizard-headed hybrids. 2
oṃ vajra-krodha-vijaya hūṃ hana hana hūṃ phaṭ | oṃ vajrakrodhī-lāsyaki hūṃ | oṃ vajra-vyāghra-mukha hūṃ | oṃ vajra-gṛdhra-mukhi hūṃ |
These are the mantras for the great wrathful king Viyaya, the vajra queen Lāsyakī, and the emanated deities, the tiger- and vulture-headed hybrids.
oṃ vajra-kroda-nīladaṇḍa hūṃ daha daha hūṃ phaṭ | oṃ vajra-krodhī-tīra hūṃ | oṃ vajra-camara-mukhi hūṃ | oṃ vajra-droṇa-mukhi hūṃ |
These are the mantras for the wrathful king Nīladaṇḍa, the vajra queen Tīrā, and the emanated deities, the yak- and raven-headed hybrids.
oṃ vajra-krodha-yamāntaka hūṃ paca paca hūṃ phaṭ | oṃ vajra-krodhī-śmaśānapati hūṃ | oṃ vajra-hariṇa-mukha hūṃ | oṃ vajrolūka-mukhi hūṃ |
These are the mantras for the wrathful king Yamāntaka, the vajra queen Śmaśānapatī, and the emanated deities, the deer- and owl-headed hybrids.
oṃ vajra-krodhāryācala hūṃ bandha bandha hūṃ phaṭ | oṃ vajrakrodhī-musala hūṃ | oṃ vajra-citraka-mukha hūṃ | oṃ vajra-prītu-mukhi hūṃ |
These are the mantras for the wrathful king Āryācala, the vajra queen Musalā, 3 and the emanated deities, the leopard- and crow-headed hybrids. 4
oṃ vajra-krodha-hayagrīva hūṃ hulu hulu hūṃ phaṭ | oṃ vajra-krodhī-jayati hūṃ | oṃ vajra-viḍāla-mukha hūṃ | oṃ vajra-pakṣita-mukhi hūṃ |
These are the mantras for the wrathful king Hayagrīva, the vajra queen Jayatī, 5 and the emanated deities, the cat- and hoopoe-headed hybrids.
oṃ vajra-krodhāparājita hūṃ tiṣṭha tiṣṭha hūṃ phaṭ | oṃ vajrakrodhī-savyati hūṃ | oṃ vajra-sṛgāla-muka hūṃ | oṃ vajra-pañcaraṇa-mukhi hūṃ |
These are the mantras for the wrathful king Aparājita, the vajra queen Śaryātī, 6 and the emanated deities, the jackal- and hawk-headed 7 hybrids.
oṃ vajrakrodha-amṛtakuṇḍali hūṃ chindha chindha hūṃ phaṭ | oṃ vajrakrodhī-savyamiti hūṃ | oṃ vajra-simha-mukha hūṃ | oṃ vajra-titīla-mukhi hūṃ |
These are the mantras for the wrathful king Amṛtakuṇḍali, the vajra queen Śabdamayī, 8 and the emanated deities, the lion- and bat-headed hybrids.
oṃ vajra-krodha-trailokyavijaya hūṃ bindha bindha hūṃ phaṭ | oṃ vajrakrodhī-māraya hūṃ | oṃ vajra-tarakṣī-mukha hūṃ | oṃ vajra-nakula-mukhi hūṃ |
These are the mantras for the wrathful king Trailokyavijaya, the vajra queen Mārayā, and the emanated deities, the hyena- and mongoose-headed hybrids.
oṃ vajra-krodha-mahābala hūṃ sphoṭa sphoṭa hūṃ phaṭ | oṃ vajrakrodhī-cuṇḍama hūṃ | oṃ vajra-ṛkṣa-mukha hūṃ | oṃ vajra-kaṣīkā-mukhi hūṃ |
These are the mantras for the wrathful king Mahābala, the vajra queen Cundī, 9 and the emanated deities, the bear- and bird-headed 10 hybrids.
oṃ vajra-yakṣasada hūṃ jaḥ | oṃ vajra-bhairave hūṃ hūṃ | oṃ vajrāmṛta hūṃ vaṃ | oṃ vajra-māraṇi hūṃ hoḥ |
These are the mantras for the hoopoe-headed goddess in the east, the magpie-headed goddess in the south, the owl-headed goddess in the west, and the hawk-headed goddess in the north. 11
Come now we pray, O deities of wisdom wrath,
So that we may receive empowerment and accomplishment
In order to accomplish saṃsāra as Vajrakīla.
And having come, O deities of wisdom wrath,
Reveal the signs and marks of accomplishment,
And bestow upon us the blessings of Kīla!
The time for the great samaya has come! 12
The time for the great emanations has come! 13
The time for the great emissaries has come! 14
The time for the great sovereigns has come! 15
The time for the great territorial goddesses has come! 16
The time for the śvanmukhā goddesses has come! 17
The time to liberate is now!
Having generated the mind bent on awakening,
We vidyādharas follow the heirs
Of the buddhas throughout the three times
And use the blessings of the great wrathful king himself
To immediately summon here before us
All enemies, hostile forces, demons and obstructors,
Who cause us harm and show us spite,
Subjugating and liberating them all.
With their bodies and speech ground to dust,
Let them experience great suffering.
oṃ laṃ hūṃ laṃ stambhanaṃ mohaṃ ghātaya bhagavān hrīḥ stṝh vikṛta vajra-hūṃkāra hūṃ | oṃ vajrakīli kīlaya jaḥ hūṃ vaṃ hoḥ | sarva-vighnān vajrakīli kīlaya hūṃ phaṭ |
The demons who harm us,
The demons who torment our minds,
And the demons by the name of so-and-so
Are seized, struck down, and bound.
They are identified and separated from their allies.
Having been summoned from afar, they shall obey!
They are taken down and severely tortured!
Now that they have fallen under our dominion,
They bow to our commands and swear us their allegiance.
hūṃ paravidyā chindha chindha hūṃ phaṭ | bindha bindha hūṃ phaṭ | gṛhna gṛhna hūṃ phaṭ | bandha bandha hūṃ phaṭ | trāśaya trāśaya hūṃ phaṭ | hasayara hasayara hrīḥ danḍa hūṃ phaṭ | śīghram ānaya hūṃ phaṭ | jvalāpaya jvalāpaya hūṃ phaṭ | āveśaya āveśaya hūṃ phaṭ | bindhaya bindhaya hūṃ phaṭ |
Emissaries, servants, and messengers, 18
The time has come to fulfil your oaths!
Enact your wrathful subjugating activities as we desire,
And grant your blessings so that they are accomplished!
hana hana vajra | daha daha vajra | paca paca vajra | matha matha vajra | jvala jvala vajra | suru suru vajra | muru muru vajra | kaṭaṅkaṭe jaye vijaye ajite aparājite māra-sena-pramardani hūṃ phaṭ |
The great kings of mighty wrath
Will shatter into a hundred pieces
The heads of any wicked being
Who transgresses the Secret Vajra command!
Listen, all you obstructors and false guides,
Transgress my commands you shall not!
hūṃ mama vaśaṃ kuru |
Leave now, all you malicious and arrogant beings,
No matter whether you be gods or demons!
Any demon who happens to create obstacles
Shall be deprived of all their strength and powers!
sarvānaya hūṃ phaṭ | tathāya tathāya hūṃ phaṭ |
Any evil being who transgresses my commands
Shall be pounded by the blazing vajra pestle.
Their hearts will be incinerated by vajra fire
And their bodies and minds reduced to dust.
As they are pounded with vajra hammers
In the blazing mortars of the wrathful mothers,
Even the most powerful of gods will be liberated!
khataṃ khataṃ khataṃ hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ vajra-yakṣa-krodha kha kha khāhi khāhi ha ha hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ |
Such is the truth of dharmatā! May we receive the blessings of Secret Mantra! May we accrue might through the buddhas’ blessings! May we remain dedicated to suchness!
hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ | ho ho ho | phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ |