The ‘Chinese’ Practice of Averting Periodic Obstacles 1
Homage to Noble Mañjuśrī.
This is “The ‘Chinese’ Practice of Averting Periodic Obstacles.”
Homage to all noble ones.
May the wise protect us.
Homage to all excellent ones.
May the gods of the sky protect us.
Homage to the gods of the abode of Brahmā.
To all who wield power over the three planes of existence,
We pay homage and make offerings.
All days are virtuous.
All constellations are excellent.
All buddhas possess great magical powers.
By the power of these words of truth,
May we always experience happiness and wellbeing. 2
oṃ vāgīśvari muṃ | oṃ maṇi-padme hūṃ | oṃ vajra-pāṇi hūṃ |
oṃ mahe lady ablaze with glory ye svāhā | oṃ mahākāli moṭayé svāhā | oṃ akani nikani abhiya maṇḍale svāhā |
Everything favourable or unfavourable, auspicious or inauspicious, lies in the domain of astrology. May the deities protect and guard us! 3
Defeat the threats posed by the five elements and always protect us!
For us, our family and friends:
May all misfortune be ended,
Just as when an eon is consumed by apocalyptic flames
And everything is instantly auspicious.
May our virtue increase like the waxing moon.
For our patrons and benefactors, and their families and friends:
Prevent disturbances caused by the mother’s luck element. 4
Prevent disturbances caused by the child’s luck element.
Prevent yakṣas from stealing our parents’ life-span.
Prevent rākṣasīs from disguising themselves  as humans.
Prevent rākṣasīs from hunting deer and wild asses. 5
Prevent the reversal of the cycle of our luck and fortune.
Prevent the decline of our subtle body.
Prevent the deterioration of our influence, our sustenance, our land.
Prevent the victory banner of luck 6 from being torn down.
Prevent the dissipation of our life-force.
Prevent the coat of our elements from being torn asunder. 7
Prevent disturbances caused by personal obstacles. 8
Prevent disturbances caused by the three compatible signs. 9
Prevent disturbances caused by the seventh-removed aspect. 10
Prevent disturbances caused by hostile forces. 11
Prevent disturbances caused by the fourth-removed adversarial aspect. 12
Prevent disturbances caused by inauspicious directions. 13
Prevent the ‘cutting influence of demons’. 14
Prevent disturbances caused by the ‘five demons’.
Prevent disturbances caused by ‘corporal punishment’.
Prevent disturbances caused by inauspicious constellations. 15
Prevent disturbances caused by inauspicious configurations. 16
Prevent disturbances caused by deadly combinations.
Prevent disturbances caused by calamities. 17
Prevent disturbances caused by the hours. 18
Prevent disturbances that stem from suffering.
Prevent disturbances that stem from the four iron years. 19
Prevent disturbances that stem from the eight fire years.
Prevent disturbances that stem from bad luck.
For us, our family and friends:
Prevent disturbances caused by enraged ancestral spirits.
Prevent disturbances that stem from obstacle years.
Prevent disturbances that stem from obstacle months.
Prevent disturbances that stem from obstacle days.
Prevent disturbances that stem from obstructing foods.
Prevent disturbances that stem from obstructing hours.
Prevent disturbances caused by obstacle-creating demons.
Prevent disturbances caused by the planets and stars.
Prevent disturbances caused by the sun.
Prevent disturbances caused by the moon.
Prevent us from meeting the ‘tomb-sign obstacles’. 20
Prevent us from meeting the tomb-sign obstacles of the vitality element. 21
Prevent us from meeting the tomb-sign obstacles of the body element.
Prevent us from meeting the tomb-sign obstacles of the destiny element.
Prevent us from meeting the tomb-sign obstacles of the luck element.
Prevent us from meeting the disease-sign obstacles.
Prevent us from meeting the death-sign obstacles.
Avert the enemy aspect of the vitality element. 22
Avert the enemy aspect of the luck element.
Avert the enemy aspect of the body element.
Avert the enemy aspect of the destiny element.
Avert the enemy aspects of all the elements.
Avert the enemy aspect of the year.
Avert the enemy aspect of the month.
Avert the enemy aspect of the day.
Avert the enemy aspect of the hour.
Prevent disturbances caused by our hopes and desires.
Prevent disturbances of the greater obstructing the lesser.
Prevent disturbances of citizens obstructing their leaders.
Prevent disturbances of leaders obstructing their citizens.
Prevent disturbances of sons obstructing their fathers.
Prevent disturbances of fathers obstructing their sons.
Prevent disturbances of wives obstructing their husbands.
Prevent disturbances of husbands obstructing their wives.
Prevent disturbances of daughters obstructing their mothers.
Prevent disturbances of mothers obstructing their daughters.
Prevent disturbances of sisters obstructing their brothers.
Prevent disturbances of brothers obstructing their sisters.
For us, our family and friends:
Prevent the ‘demons that shoot arrows’ between the li and khen trigrams. 23
Prevent the ‘entanglement’ among us. 24
Prevent the ‘clashing of swords and stakes’ between the dva and the zin trigram. 25
Prevent the ‘crossing of black spears’ between the ging and zin trigrams. 26
Prevent us from encountering the nine-multiple obstacles of the eight trigrams. 27
Prevent us from encountering the nine-multiple obstacles of the nine numeric squares.
Prevent us from encountering any of the nine-multiple obstacles.
Prevent those who are older from encountering the nine-multiple obstacles.
Prevent those who are younger from encountering the nine-multiple obstacles.
Prevent women from encountering the nine-multiple obstacles.
Prevent men from encountering the nine-multiple obstacles.
Prevent us from encountering the nine-multiple obstacles that coincide with a tomb sign. 28
Avert the eighty-one great adversities for older men. 29
Avert the thirty-seven great adversities for younger men.
Avert the nine great adversities for young boys.
Avert the sixty-one great adversities for older women.
Avert the forty-nine great adversities for younger women.
Avert the twenty-five great adversities for young girls.
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the earth constitution with the male fire dragon sign. 30
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the water constitution with the male fire dragon sign.
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the iron constitution with the female water ox sign. 31
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the wood and iron constitutions with the female fire sheep sign.
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the dva trigram with the earth dog sign.
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the kham trigram with the female fire sheep sign.
Prevent the ‘breaching the gates with swords’ for the female earth ox sign.
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the khon trigram with the male iron dragon sign.
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the gin trigram with the male iron dog sign.
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the zon trigram with the female iron sheep sign.
Prevent the ‘descent of demons from the sky’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the li trigram and the male water dog sign. 32
Prevent ‘madness and hostility’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the zon trigram and the female water ox sign.
Prevent the ‘descent of demons from the sky’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the li trigram and the male wood dragon sign.
Prevent the ‘breaking of the turquoise necklace’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the kham trigram and the fire ox sign.
Prevent the ‘breaking of promises and children dying’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the khen trigram and the male earth dog sign.
Prevent the ‘breaking of the maternal family line’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the dva trigram and the female earth sheep sign.
Prevent the ‘female wolf causing grievance’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the khon trigram and the male iron dog sign.
Prevent the ‘householder falling off a cliff’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the li trigram and the female iron ox sign.
Prevent the ‘sudden emergence of disease’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the zon trigram and the male water dragon sign.
Prevent the ‘death of the female householder due to a knife accident’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the zin trigram and the female water sheep sign.
Prevent the ‘breaking of the family line by a child falling to the ground’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the gin trigram and the male wood dog sign.
Prevent ‘widowhood’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the kham trigram and the female wood ox sign.
Prevent children from being harmed by the first multiple of nine—‘overpowered by afflictions.’
Prevent children from being harmed by the second multiple of nine (eighteen)—‘emergence from a dark womb.’
Prevent children from being harmed by the third multiple of nine (twenty-seven)—‘the deliverance of weapons, corpses and money’.
Prevent children from being harmed by the fourth multiple of nine (thirty-six)—‘robbing the lord’s residence’.
Prevent children from being harmed by the fifth multiple of nine (forty-five)—‘the spirit lord Ngazor’. 33
Prevent children from being harmed by the sixth multiple of nine (fifty-four)—‘the growl of the father guardian deity’.
Prevent children from being harmed by the seventh multiple of nine (sixty-three)—‘death by knife and rattling the cemetery gates.’
Prevent children from being harmed by the eighth multiple of nine (seventy-two)—‘little love and much anger’.
Prevent children from being harmed by the ninth multiple of nine (eighty-one)—‘the prisoner exiting the house’.
For us, our family and friends:
Avert the nine-multiple obstacle, ‘residing in the cemetery’.
Avert the nine-multiple obstacle, ‘the clashing of stakes.’ 34
Avert the nine-multiple obstacle, ‘entanglement.’ 35
Avert the nine-multiple obstacle, ‘death by knife.’
Avert the nine-multiple fire obstacle, ‘contagious and preexisting diseases.’
Avert the nine-multiple wood obstacle, ‘sudden primordial bewitchers.’ 36
Avert the nine-multiple water obstacle, ‘the coming of fierce water diseases.’
Avert the nine-multiple earth obstacle, ‘the disease of discomfort.’
Avert the nine-multiple space obstacle, ‘the entrance into the cemetery.’
Avert the nine-multiple obstacle, ‘the gate of conditions.’
Prevent the human-trading gods from selling humans.
Prevent the human-acquiring demons from purchasing humans.
Prevent the body from being pierced at the stake. 37
Prevent the felling of the tree of vitality.
Prevent the fence of destiny from being destroyed.
Prevent the victory banner of luck from being torn down.
Prevent the arrangement of the throne of the king of the year.
Prevent the ministers of the month from holding council.
Prevent the soldiers of the day from going to war.
Prevent construction of the weapon of the hour.
Prevent the weakening of the trigrams.
Prevent our constituents from being devoured by rākṣasas.
Prevent the descent of disaster-inducing demons.
Prevent the five demons from spying on us.
Prevent the black demon minister from gaining entry.
Prevent the revival of demonic corpses.
Prevent the suppression of the dark house.
Prevent the hundred mouths from talking.
Prevent the thousand eyes from gazing.
Prevent us from being enslaved by our hated enemies.
Prevent us from being exposed by our dear friends.
Prevent the removal of boulders from the sunny white mountain. 38
Prevent the felling of trees in the dark black forest.
Prevent the decline of the power of rulers, lords, and kings.
Prevent the clearance of the spiritual teacher’s residence.
Prevent monastic discipline from breaking down.
Prevent doctors from making misdiagnoses.
Prevent mistaken astrological calculations.
Prevent the clearing of shrines dedicated to Shenrab. 39
Prevent the crystal garuḍa of the ninth stage of heaven from flapping his wings. 40
Prevent the black charnel pig of the ninth subterranean layer from grunting.
Prevent the copper bull from grinding his horns.
Prevent enemies from attacking us from above.
Prevent the si demons of the past from suddenly appearing.
Prevent the opening of fearsome charnel grounds.
Prevent the advent of the three hundred and sixty primordial bewitchers. 41
Avert the eighty-one accidents.
Avert the three hundred thousand types of evil spirits.
Prevent the evil si demons from attacking humans and their livestock.
Prevent the evil si demons from turning our neighbors into enemies.
Prevent war from ever arising in any direction.
Avert the hostile gods and demons of this kaliyuga.
Avert bad signs in dreams.
Avert black magic, sorcery, curses, and witchcraft.
Avert broken oaths, evil diagrams and wicked spells.
Thus pacify all adversities, without exception.