Lasel Chenmo: A Sang Offering to the Nāgas Brief Confession to the Earth Lords
Kye! When sang first arose from where did it arise?
It first arose in the centre of Jambudvīpa,
Formed in the haze and darkness of the sky.
Various plants appeared upon the earth.
And an ocean of milk came into being,
In which many flowers began to grow,
And showers of nourishing nectar-like medicine rained down.
In the palace of the five families of great bliss,
To Jambhala, king of nāgas, we offer.
In the supreme place, the nāga palace,
To the nāga king Ratnacūḍa, we offer.
To the types of nāga who surround him, we offer.
To the hosts of white nāgas, we offer.
To the hosts of blue nāgas, we offer.
To the hosts of dark nāgas, we offer.
To the hosts of yellow nāgas, we offer.
To the hosts of green nāgas, we offer.
To the hosts of multi-coloured nāgas, we offer.
To the hosts of red nāgas, we offer.
To the hosts of black nāgas, we offer.
To the hosts of white nāgas from the royal caste, we offer.
To the hosts of yellow nāgas from the merchant caste, we offer.
To the hosts of black nāgas from the priestly caste, we offer.
To the hosts of green nāgas from the commoners' caste, we offer.
To the hosts of black nāgas from the untouchables' caste, we offer.
We offer to the four great kings and their retinue.
We offer to the eight great nāgas and their retinue.
We offer to the planets and the constellations.
We offer to the female nāgas: as horses and as riches.
We offer to the female nāgas: as sheep and as wealth.
We offer to the female nāgas: as food and as treasure.
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live there in the mountains to the right.
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live here in the mountains to the left.
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live in streaming water.
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live in solid rock.
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live in flowing air.
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live in stable space.
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live in the mountains.
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live in the oceans.
We offer to the gods and nāgas  who live in supreme lands.
We offer to the gods and nāgas who live in springs.
O nāgas, as a result of these purifying offerings to you,
May all contagious diseases among human beings cease!
May all financial loss and ruin come to an end!
May the si demons who plague horses be eliminated!
And may diseases among sheep be brought to an end!
We offer nourishing nectar-like medicine.
If there is disease, today let it be purified.
If there is impurity, today let it be purified.
If there is instability, today let it be purified.
If there is contamination, today let it be purified.
If there is dispersal, today let it be purified.
This purifying sang turns dry stone into gold.
This purifying sang causes dead trees to sprout new branches.
To the 360 nāgas, we offer.
To the 21,000 beneficial nāgas, we offer.
To the nāgas who guard the treasury of all that is desirable, we offer.
To the nāgas who increase livestock, we offer.
To the nāgas who increase prosperity, we offer.
To the nāgas who cause human beings to multiply, we offer.
To the nāgas who increase wealth, we offer.
To the nāgas who increase stocks of sheep, we offer.
To the nāgas who increase stocks of horses, we offer.
Guard continuously the powerful teachings,
Nāgas who sustain longevity and protect the life-force,
Nāga guardians of fortune and authentic presence ( wang-tang ),
To the 360 treasuries of the nāgas, we offer.
To the twelve tenma , sisters of the nāgas, we offer.
Increase and protect our progeny and wealth!
Kye! Nanda, Upananda, Takṣaka
Śaṅkhapāla, Many-Limbed Grasper and the rest—
The eight great nāga kings and nāgas of the four castes:
Come now, instantly, together with your retinues!
We offer various medicines untainted by poison,
Well-made pills of amṛta nectar,
And vast gifts of purifying incense smoke!
Please accept them with great delight,
And, having pacified all resentment and poisons of the mind,
Generate bodhicitta , the mind of awakening.
Do not permit blight, untimely frost, or drought.
Pacify diseases that threaten people and livestock.
Let the rains fall on time.
Cause harvests and herds to be forever bountiful and well,
And make Dharma, wealth and happiness thrive!
May all those beings who are sick
Be swiftly freed from sickness!
May all diseases that affect living beings
Never return!
May the nāga kings Nanda and Upananda
And all the devas who have faith in the teachings,
As well as kings and patrons,
And all who are in poverty,
Live long, in good health and prosperity,
And may they gain lasting happiness!
Homage to the guru, Lord Avalokiteśvara!
In the Buddha, the Dharma and the Supreme Assembly
I take refuge until I attain enlightenment.
Through the merit of practising generosity and so on,
May I attain buddhahood for the benefit of all beings.
In an instant I appear clearly as Avalokiteśvara. Before me, in the centre of a delightful nāga palace surrounded by lakes covered with three-petalled white lotuses, and by lovely pools, trees, meadows and springs, are discs of sun and moon and a syllable HRĪḤ, from which Lord Khasarpāṇi appears. He is white in colour, with one face and two hands. His right hand is in the gesture of supreme generosity and his left holds a lotus at his heart. He is adorned with precious ornaments, and sits with his right leg extended and left leg drawn in. At his three centres are the three syllables OṂ, ĀḤ and HŪṂ. At the lower portion of his heart is a syllable HRĪḤ.
Surrounding noble Avalokiteśvara are Vāsuki, Śaṅkhapāla, Nanda, Upananda, Padma, Varuṇa, the Glorious, the Radiant, Kulika, and Balavat—the eight great nāga kings. Their upper bodies are dressed in human clothes, they each have seven hooded serpent heads, and their lower bodies are twisting serpent tails. They are completely surrounded by nāgas and earth lords.
From the seed-syllable at your heart, rays of light stream out to invite every type and caste of nāga.
They dissolve into the front visualization.
From the syllable HRĪḤ in the Noble One's hands flows a stream of nectar containing all that is desirable. All the nāgas and earth-lords drink from it and are cleansed. All their harmful deeds of body, speech and mind are purified and they feel a special joy and reverence.
All dharmas originate from causes.
The Tathāgata has taught these causes,
And also that which puts a stop to these causes—
This too has been taught by the Great Śramaṇa.
Commit not a single unwholesome action,
Cultivate a wealth of virtue,
Tame completely this mind of ours—
This is the teaching of the buddhas.
oṃ vipula-garbhe maṇi-prabhe tathāgata-nidarśane maṇi maṇi suprabhe vimale sāgara gambhīre hūṃ hūṃ jvala jvala buddhāvilokite guhyādhiṣṭite garbhe svāhā | 2 padmadhara amogha jayate curu curu svāhā ||
Unspoilt by defects, your body is white,
Your crown is adorned with the perfect buddha,
And with eyes of compassion you gaze on all beings—
Avalokiteśvara, to you we offer homage!
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ
Eight great nāga kings, nāgas of the four castes,
And all you minor nāgas, inconceivable in number:
Accept this offering of torma.
May it delight and satisfy you!
Poisonous glimpses, poisonous contact,
Poisonous breath, poisonous injury,
Poisonous malice and such like—
Pacify all these poisons of the nāgas!
Through the truth of our own positive intentions
And the power of dedicating our offerings,
May all harm from the nāgas be pacified!
Through the nāga medicine jātiphala (nutmeg),
May the head sickness of the nāgas be healed!
Through onyx and cuttlebone,
May visual impairment and malady of the brain be healed!
Through utpala flower and mother of pearl,
May ailments of the nose and the jaw be healed!
Through sindoor 3 and vermillion, the flesh and blood;
Through silk and cowries, the tongue and teeth;
And through conch and saffron, may weakness in the bones
And deterioration of odours be remedied!
May white sandalwood cure fever,
And peacock feather restore dullness of complexion!
May silk brocade and the heart zhosha ,
Heal problems with the skin and heart!
May the kidney zhosha heal the kidneys
And the lagor zhosha heal the lungs!
May makara-claw and markata
Heal any impairments of the nails and limbs!
May calabash heal stomach ailments
And spikenard heal impairments of discipline!
May dendrobium nobile and asbestos
Heal disorders of the ligaments and sinews!
May heart-leaved moonseed and false black pepper
Heal intestinal problems!
May chebulic myrobalan heal the internal organs,
And the supreme medicine of mare's-tail
Heal degenerations of the dwelling place!
May the five precious substances restore the treasury,
And the three whites and three sweets
Replenish stores of food and drink!
Throughout all the lands of this world,
May the rains forever fall on time,
And harvests and herds be forever bountiful and well.
In particular, for all those who reside in this place,
And for us practitioners and our patrons,
May all nāga diseases, such as imbalances
Of wind, bile and phlegm, be pacified!
May famine and conflict be overcome!
Grant us the attainments of pacifying, enriching and the rest!
Adorned with the finest ornaments, and practising the Dharma,
Peaceful, perfectly restrained, and chaste in conduct—
This is what it means to be a monk or nun, an ascetic or a brahmin.
There are none who do not fear weapons,
For everyone avoids whatever threatens life.
Take the example of your own body,
And do no harm to others!
All you nāgas of the royal caste, priestly caste, merchant caste, commoners' caste and untouchables, depart this very instant and return to your own place in whichever direction it may be!
May all the spirits gathered here
In this place of offering—those who travel beneath the earth,
Those who dwell upon the earth,
And those who move about above it—
All be satisfied and return,
Each to their own separate abode!
Take the example of your own body,
And do no harm to others!
Kye! For all of us practitioners and patrons,
No matter where we may go or reside,
All that we do towards you inhabitants of these places,
All you devas, nāgas and nyen spirits,
Including the actions of our ancestors in the past,
And of our descendants in future generations—
Any transgressions, such as digging the spirits of the earth, raising the spirits of stone,
Stirring the spirits of water, cutting the spirits of trees,
Improper handling of corpses, polluting the home, sorcery, and the like—
Whatever we have done (or will do) in our ignorance,
We hereby declare and confess: may it all be purified!
Hūṃ! To Padmasambhava, the vidyādhara of Oḍḍiyāna,
Foremost of ḍākinīs, Princess Mandāravā,
Yeshe Tsogyal, Nubchen, monks and translators,
Tsasum Lingpa, the vidyādhara Mijik Dorje,
And all the root and lineage masters,
We offer this sang of samaya substances and nectar.
Carry out your enlightened activity and bring us and others to awakening!