Increasing the Light of Wisdom A Guru Yoga of the All-Seeing Mahāpaṇḍita Mipham Jamyang I. Preliminaries 1. Taking Refuge 2. Generating Bodhicitta II. Main Practice 1. Visualization 2. Gathering the Accumulations 3. Prayer III. Conclusion 1. Receiving Empowerment and the Dissolution 2. Arising from the Session
Namo mañjuśrī-gurave!
I and all others, each and every sentient being,
From this moment on, until we attain awakening,
Take refuge in the supreme guru and Three precious Jewels;
Inspire my mind with your blessings.
For the sake of beings, space-like in their infinitude,
I shall continually apply myself to this supreme yoga
Of the guru, the profound essence of the path,
And attain the level that remains in neither existence nor quiescence.
Out of a state of emptiness, in which no dualistic phenomena are observed,
In the sky before me, upon a lion-throne, lotus and moon-disc seat,
Appears the great treasury of knowledge, Mipham Namgyal,
Brilliant white, smiling peacefully, with his right hand in Dharma-teaching mudrā,
Holding an utpala flower on whose bed rests a sword,
And his left, in the gesture of equanimity, holding a volume of sūtra and mantra.
He wears dharma robes and his two legs are crossed.
On his head he wears an elegant paṇḍita hat with long ear flaps.
He appears clearly as the embodiment of all infinite sources of refuge,
His three centres marked by the three seed-syllables.
To the glorious guru, who embodies all sources of refuge,
I prostrate while devotions fills my body, speech and mind;
I present clouds of outer, inner and secret offerings;
I confess misdeeds and downfalls amassed in beginningless lives;
I rejoice in all the virtues of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa;
I request the turning of the unsurpassable Dharma wheel;
I pray that you remain forever without passing into nirvāṇa;
And I dedicate all virtues towards great, unsurpassed awakening.
May I and all other beings be fully liberated from conditioned existence!
Through the blessings of the youthful Mañjuśrī, awareness and emptiness,
You released the eight treasures of eloquence from the expanse of realization,
Supreme master of an ocean of scriptural and realizational Dharma—
To you, Ajita Vijaya—Mipham Namgyal, I pray!
oṃ āh hūṃ guru mañjughoṣa ajita vijaya sarva siddhi hūṃ 2
At the centre of the guru’s heart is a white wheel
With six spokes, an orange dhīḥ syllable at its hub,
And one of the seed-syllables on each of its spokes,
From which boundless light, wheels and mantras emanate,
Dissolving into my heart-centre, purifying misdeeds and obscurations,
And clearing away all the darkness of confusion.
oṃ a ra pa ca na dhīḥ
Rays of white, red and blue light stream forth from the guru’s three centres,
And dissolve into my own body, speech and mind, gradually and all at once.
The four obscurations are purified, I receive empowerment,
And the seeds of the four kāyas are implanted within me.
The guru then dissolves into me, and I rest in the dharmatā,
Unaltered, just as it is, beholding the face of my own true nature.
From now until I reach the essence of awakening,
May the Mañjughoṣa Guru guide and care for me.
May he grant me the great treasure of unrivalled confidence
And intelligent understanding of the Buddha’s Word and all the treatises.
May all that I do—physically, verbally and mentally—
Only bring benefit to others,
And may I fully realize all the liberational qualities
Of Mipham Jamyang’s knowledge, love and power!