Advice Given to Luding Zhabdrung
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
A letter having been despatched
To the feet of the physical maṇḍala
Of the noble guru and dharma friend,
Whose pure vision is so unbounded
And noble qualities so excellent,
A response has now been received. 
The root of all phenomena is the mind.[1]
All appearances are its manifestations,
Apparent yet absent, just like an illusion. 
Mind too, with its dualistic thoughts,
Seems real but does not truly exist.
Like birth and death within a dream,
Nothing is established in actuality. 
Throughout beginningless time until now,
We’ve been confined in dualistic delusion.
Let genuine mind that is free from duality
Settle naturally, unmodified, uncontrived. 
This clear light nature of dharmadhātu
Brings great bliss that is uninterrupted.
There is no illness or suffering herein. 
If you can hold true, therefore, and avoid
Slipping into your own mind’s delusion,
You’ll find the essence of the guru, yidam,
And all the protectors of the Dharma. 
There is no 'saṃsāra' to be rid of
And no nirvāṇa to be attained.
This is 'saṃsāra and nirvāṇa indivisible’.
This is the bright torch that overcomes ignorance,
The great remedy for all disease and evil spirits. 
Make this, then, your practice.
For as long as you’re caught in conceptuality, there’ll be no liberation.
All conceptual thoughts arise spontaneously.
Let them free themselves within the unborn state. 
These brief words of advice I offer to you. 
There is no need to offer a gift, but I request that you always grant spiritual assistance. 
Offered, together with a humble token of appreciation, by Chökyi Lodrö.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2022.

Bibliography
Tibetan Edition
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. “Klu lding zhabs drung la gnang ba’i gdams pa” In 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir, H.P.: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. (W1KG12986) Vol. 8: 257–258

Version: 1.1-20221207




From this line onwards until the final colophon the text mirrors that of Advice Imparted to Hocho Zhabdrung  ↩