Praise and Prayer to Kharchu, Great Sacred Place of Lhodrak
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Namo guru padmarājāya!
Like a second Akaniṣṭha transported to this world,
This great vajra place of Lhodrak Kharchu
Was blessed repeatedly by the Lotus-born master of Oḍḍiyāna and consort,
As well as the disciples — the king and subjects—, the vidyādharas of India,
And many learned and accomplished masters,
Especially Namkhai Nyingpo, who gained accomplishment
Directly through Viśuddha-Jālaśaṃvara
And attained miraculous powers, realization and the highest view.[1]
Millions upon millions of vīras and ḍākinīs,
Like an abundance of sesame seeds, revel and delight
In this supremely sacred place,
Which is visible to the eye.
For those of us with good karma and fortune,
There is the wondrous vajra cave with its domed ceiling —
Perfectly elegant, solid and enduring yet spontaneously formed,
And its images of the symbols of the three roots,
Blazing with splendour, imbued with the blessings of the three secrets.
Fields and meadows resemble a maṇḍala of turquoise
With divine flowers, all vividly bright and colourful.
Various trees sway in the breeze,
And are laden with finest fruit.
Heavenly birds call out in sweetest song,
And nectar-like water possessing the eight qualities
Gently cascades and flows in streams.
There are male and female yogis and holders of awareness,
Visible and invisible, too numerous to count,
And inexhaustible Dharma riches and profound treasures —
To this great place of abundant accomplishment,
I pray: inspire me with your blessings!
Supreme vajra place, Devīkoṭa,[2]
Through infusing this practitioner's body,
And gathering outer, inner and other as one,
Cause me to gain control of energy-mind and appearances,
Delight the gathering of vīras and ḍākinīs,
And actualise the level of Yangdak-Cakrasaṃvara! 
The vidyādhara Kunzang Ösal Nyingpo Tsal prayed in this way on the 20th day of the monkey month of the Fire Monkey year[3] while passing through this very place. Siddhirastu!
| Translated by Adam Pearcey 2018, with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation.

Bibliography
Tibetan Edition
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "lho brag gnas chen mkhar chu'i bstod pa dang gsol 'debs/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 10: 337–338




Namkhai Nyingpo of the Nub (gnubs/snubs) clan, who is counted among Guru Padmasambhava's twenty-five disciples, was exiled by King Trisong Deutsen to Lhodrak, where he meditated on Yangdak Heruka (here equated with Jālaśaṃvara/Cakrasaṃvara) and attained accomplishment. Kharchu Monastery later became the seat of Namkhai Nyingpo's incarnations.  ↩


Lhamo Kharchen is identified with Devīkoṭa, one of the 24 sacred places.  ↩


1956  ↩