Concise White Tārā Sādhana
In the Buddha, the Dharma and the Supreme Assembly
I take refuge until I attain enlightenment.
Through the merit of practising generosity and so on,
May I attain buddhahood for the benefit of all beings.
oṃ svabhāva śuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāva śuddho ‘haṃ
Out of the state of emptiness, upon a lotus and moon,
Through the transformation of a white syllable Tāṃ,
I become the noble White Tārā,
With one face and two hands—the right in the mudrā of supreme giving
And the left granting protection and holding a lotus.
She smiles serenely, with a moon behind her,
And is bedecked in silk and jewel ornaments.
Although appearing clearly she is insubstantial.
At her three centres are the three syllables oṃ āḥ hūṃ ,
And in the centre of her heart upon a moon is a white hūṃ ,
From which light shoots out to invite the wisdom being,
Who dissolves indivisibly through jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ .
Empowerment deities, once invoked, confer empowerment,
And the leftover water swirls upwards,
So that Amitābha adorns her crown.
At her heart is a white wheel, the nature of the moon,
With eight spokes; in its centre is a taṃ
And on the spokes eight syllables clearly appear.
Light radiates out, makes offerings to the noble ones, collects their blessings,
And gathers the vital essence of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa in particular
In the form of nectar and rays of light,
All of which dissolves into the wheel at my heart,
From which a stream of nectar flows out to fill my body
And wash away the potential for untimely death,
So that I gain the siddhi of long life.
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture svāhā
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture mama āyur puṇya jñāna puṣṭiṃ kuru svāhā
Precious noble lady, transcendent conqueror,
Purify untimely death for me and other beings,
And grant us the blessings and attainments
Of immortal life and wisdom.
The deity appearances dissolve into the space of clear light,
And I rest in a state of profound peace beyond complexity.
Once again, I arise in the form of Tārā,
Brilliantly vivid and marked with the three syllables
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ at my three centres.
Through the positivity and merit of this, may I swiftly
Attain the realization of Noble Tārā, and thereby
Every single sentient being
Reach her state of perfection too.