The Essential Daily Practice of Vajrakīla Taking Refuge and Generating the Awakened Mind of Bodhicitta The Main Practice The Visualization Dissolution The Dedication of Merit The Prayer for Auspiciousness
Namo! In the guru, Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha, and the great awesome heruka
With the deepest devotion we take refuge. So that I and all beings, as limitless as the sky,
May be victorious over negativity, enemies and samaya-breakers,
I shall practise the wrathful Vajrakumāra.
oṃ svabhāva śuddha sarva dharma svabhāva śuddho ‘ham
From within the space of śūnyatā arise unending clouds of compassion.
The wisdom of discernment—my own rigpa awareness—appears as a dark blue hūṃ.
Its blazing rays of light purify all grasping at the environment and beings as real:
All the objects of grasping become the maṇḍala of the Burning Mountain Charnel Ground,
Naturally arisen, its features spontaneously perfect and limitless. And in its centre,
My grasping mind in its pure nature is the causal syllable, that radiates and absorbs rays of light,
Transforming into the complete embodiment of all the buddhas, the great awesome heruka,
Dark blue, with three heads, the right face white, the left one red,
And with six hands—the two on the right hold nine- and five- pointed vajras,
The two on the left wield a blazing fireball and khaṭvāṅga trident,
The last two roll and ply a kīla the size of Mount Meru.
His four legs, in a striding posture, trample on Mahādeva and Mahādevi.
He rages with overwhelming ferocity and vigour,
With vajra wings and all the heruka and charnel-ground ornaments,
In union with his consort the pale blue Dīptacakrā, who embraces him from his left hand side,
Clutching a khaṭvāṅga trident and a skull cup.
Above their heads, the wisdom garuḍa wheels and soars,
As they pace upon a lotus of many colours, and blazing sun disc,
Amid the violent, swirling flames of the universal inferno.
In his heart, in the centre of a reddish-brown dome of light,
Presides the jñānasattva, a brilliant blue Vajrasattva,
In the middle of whose heart stands a vajra, the samādhisattva, and there in its belly appears
Hūṃ, around which the mantra mālā, gleaming like molten lapis lazuli,
Rotates to the right, sending inconceivable rays of light streaming out
To make offerings to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, purify all the obscurations of sentient beings, urge on the protectors,
And destroy hostile and obstructing forces. All appearances, sounds and thoughts
Arise as the wisdom play of deity, mantra and dharmatā.
oṃ vajra kīli kīlaya sarva vighnān baṃ hūṃ phaṭ | jaḥ hūṃ āḥ ||
The environment and beings melt into light, then dissolve into me.
Then I too merge into the radiant space of luminosity, like a cloud into the sky.
Yet again, awakening in the illusory mudrā of union,
My body, speech and mind bear the indestructible vajra armour.
Through the merit of this, may I and all sentient beings
Triumph over negativity and eliminate all obstacles,
And may this be the certain cause for us all to attain the fruition of enlightenment:
The supreme nirvāṇa of Vajrakumāra!
May the root and lineage masters, who grant the supreme blessing,
The yidam Kīlaya, who showers down a rain of siddhis,
And the ḍākinīs and dharmapālas, whose activities are unobstructed,
Make all be auspicious in the circle of this infinite maṇḍala!