Song of Prayer to Milarepa
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Ocean of Kagyü siddhas, know me, care for me!
On Kailash, king of snow-capped mountains,
Resides the foremost of yogins, Lord Milarepa,
Whose name dispels the misery of the lower realms. 
Father, supreme focus of recollection, Töpa Ga,
Kindly watch over me, evildoer that I am.
Guard me from the abyss of saṃsāra’s lower realms.
Take me, your child, in your arms of compassion.
And prevent me from slipping into harmful deeds! 
I have heard the profound Dharma, sūtra and mantra,
But have failed to put it into practice in the proper way
And my character remains impervious, like a stone in water. 
As I deceive others through my pretentious acts,
While the five poisonous afflictions blaze within,
I’ll find no freedom but be anchored to the hells. 
Failing to guard vows and commitments, I stray into faults
And snatch any unmerited offerings that come my way. 
While understanding the nature of right and wrong,
I’ve fallen under the influence of unwholesome misdeeds. 
Although I meditate on the generation and completion phases,
I am constrained by ordinary perceptions and states of mind. 
My devotion for the noble gurus is only meagre,
My mumbled prayers nothing more than empty words. 
Failing to recall the kindness of all mother sentient beings,
I have surrendered my love, compassion and bodhicitta. 
I conceal the demon of self-cherishing within myself,
And nurture the bad attitude of seeking my own happiness. 
I have no pure perception of other dharma practitioners,
And am plagued by the evil spirit of cynicism and envy. 
Lord Shepa Dorje, protect wretched Lodrö,
I implore you.
And turn his mind towards the noble Dharma. 
Sung in sadness on the seventeenth day of the month.[1] 
| Translated by Adam Pearcey 2021, with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Terton Sogyal Trust.

Bibliography
Tibetan Editions
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. gsung 'bum/_'jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros/ (dbu med/). 8 vols. Gangtok: Dzongsar Khyentse Labrang, 1981–1985. W21813. Vol. 3: 76–77
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "rje mi la'i gsol 'debs/" in 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986. Vol. 8: 461–462

Version: 1.0-20211012




The date appears only in the dbu med edition. Neither edition specifies the month or year.  ↩