The Secret Drop, the Heart-Instruction of the Ḍākinīs Taking Refuge and Awakening Bodhicitta The Visualization
O Vajravārāhī, Enlightened Lady,
And Yeshé Tsogyal, Queen of Great Bliss, at your lotus feet
I pay homage, my heart full of devotion: Be my refuge!
I generate the supreme awakened mind, the bodhicitta of total liberation!
All appearance and existence, universe and beings,
Are a realm of all-inclusive purity, of bliss and emptiness,
Where offerings unsurpassed, outer, inner and secret,
Have no need to be contrived, but are naturally present, in spontaneous perfection.
This sublime, enchanting realm becomes my whole perception:
At its heart, on a lotus flower blossoming from the waters of a lake, on a cushion of discs of sun and moon,
I am Yeshé Tsogyal, beautiful, white and tinged with red,
Peacefully smiling, youthful, and seductive,
Naked, with jewel and bone ornaments,
Dancing, poised on her left leg, with her right leg bent inwards.
Symbolizing Guru Rinpoche, in his body of great bliss,
She holds a five-pointed golden vajra
In her right hand at her heart
And to symbolize the princess Mandāravā, who commands long life,
She holds a long life vase in her left hand.
Her hair is deep blue, some tied up above,
The rest tumbling and waving in tresses behind her,
Her own radiance encircles her in a sphere of rainbow light.
Vivid and brilliant she appears, a body of wisdom light.
At her heart, in a blazing jewel of light,
On a lotus, a sun disc, and then a corpse,
Stands Vajravārāhī, rich ruby red,
With a wrathful smile, and three eyes, in a rapture of bliss,
On the right side of her head grunts the head of a sow.
Holding hooked knife and skull-cup, and in dancing pose,
The pure body of co-emergent great bliss,
I imagine samayasattva and jñānasattva indivisible.
A vast skull-cup appears naturally, of its own accord,
In which are the five meats, and the five great nectars;
Clouds of everything to fulfil the mind’s desire
Gather and transform into an inexhaustible flow of beauty.
From the limitless realms of the three kāyas;
From power places, charnel grounds and domains of space,
Vast throng of the Three Roots, vīras and ḍākinīs,
Dancing in bliss, come, now, to this place!
Accept and enjoy these sumptuous objects of untainted desire!
All now melt into the essence of bliss,
And dissolve into me, granting me spontaneously the indestructible vajra body, which is
The actual essence of unchanging great bliss,
The wisdom which is one taste with
All the victorious buddhas.
oṃ padmo-yoginī guhya-jñāna vajravārāhī mahāsukha sarva-siddhi hūṃ