Fulfilment of the Wish for Twofold Accomplishment
Praise to the Glorious Lord of Yogins, the Great Sakyapa Kunga Nyingpo
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Namo Mañjuśrīye! 
Out of the vast maṇḍala of the space of bliss-emptiness,
Appears the dance-like display of the blessed guru Hevajra,
Foremost of accomplished yogins concerned for this world—
Great benevolent Kunga Nyingpo, in devotion I offer you praise. 
Your immaculate wisdom form is extremely peaceful
And in the full bloom of youth, just like Vajrasattva.
Glorious guru, master of the vajra path’s supreme stage
Of accomplishment, I bow down before your feet. 
The mirror of your wisdom reflects all knowable things,
With clear discernment of their nature and multiplicity—
O Sakyapa, supreme and truly omniscient guide,
Lord of yogins, to you I offer praise. 
The noble hero Mañjuśrī revealed to you his smiling face,
Conferred the nectar of instructions on sūtra and mantra,
And cut through all the webs of doubt and conceptuality—
Mañjughoṣa guru, in devotion I bow down at your feet. 
Though you were inseparable from the mighty Protector,
Still, in the manner of the singular manifesting as the multiple,
He appeared in a vast array of wondrous and miraculous forms,
Directly apparent, from whom you received empowerment—to you I bow. 
You cared for all disciples through the four means of attraction,
Through the gift of Dharma, you planted the seed of liberation,
And you guided the fortunate to the level of the four kāyas—
Supreme guide, sovereign of Dharma, at your feet I bow. 
Simultaneously you manifest an array of multiple forms,
Travelling to the five pure realms, where in your compassion
You constantly care for disciples—O great benevolent lord,
With a mind of constant reverence, I offer you praise. 
Inspire me, O venerable Sakyapa, so that throughout my lives
I may take you as my guide, as the lord of all buddha families,
And diligently apply myself to the precious spoken teachings
Of Lamdré, the very essence of all instructions. 
Inspire me to receive the four empowerments, purify the four obscurations, Complete the fourfold dissolution and attain the level of the four kāyas.
And inspire me to become a great leader of beings,
A captain whose enlightened qualities and activity defy the imagination. 
Until I reach such attainment, throughout all the intervening time,
Inspire me with the riches of the seven qualities of the higher realms,
And through my generation of the supreme mind of bodhicitta,
Let me bring vast benefit to the teachings and to beings. 
In short, through my offering to you, the guru,
My body, speech and mind, as well as whatever I possess,
May I never be apart from you, even for a single moment,
And may I serve and delight you in all my lives to come. 
Thus, Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö prayed with single-pointed devotion while at Lhundrup Teng in Derge on the day of the master’s anniversary in the Aśvinī [i.e., ninth] month in the Earth Dragon year. Sarvārtha siddhirastu!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2022.

Bibliography
Tibetan Edition
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "rnal 'byor gyi dbang phyug dpal sa skya ba chen po kun dga' snying po'i bstod pa/" In 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir, H.P.: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. (BDRC W1KG12986). Vol. 2: 647–649

Version: 1.0-20230203