The Excellent Path to Omniscience The Dzogchen Preliminary Practice of the Heart-Essence of the Vast Expanse (Longchen Nyingtik) Homage to Rigdzin Jikme Lingpa The Blessing of the Speech The Vowel Mantra The Consonant Mantra Mantra of the essence of interdependent origination Mantras for Multiplying the Power of Recitation 1. Invoking the Lama The Four Thoughts that Turn the Mind from Saṃsāra: A Brief Version The Four Thoughts that Turn the Mind from Saṃsāra Free and Well-Favoured Human Birth Impermanence Karma: Cause and Effect The Suffering of Saṃsāra Invoking the Lama’s Compassion to Avoid Pitfalls on the Path 11 a. The Three Yānas b. View, Meditation and Action c. Distractions of the Present Life d. The Eight Worldly Concerns 2. Taking Refuge 3. The Generation of Bodhicitta: the Heart of the Awakened Mind 4. Vajrasattva Purification 5. The Trikāya Mandala Offering a. Nirmāṇakāya Mandala Offering b. Saṃbhogakāya Mandala Offering c. Dharmakāya Mandala Offering 6. The Accumulation of the Kusulu: Chö 7. Guru Yoga a. The Visualization The Seven-Line Prayer c. The Seven Branches of Devotional Practice 24 i. Prostration ii. Offering iii. Confession iv. Rejoicing v. Imploring the Buddhas to Turn the Wheel of Dharma vi. Requesting the Buddhas and Teachers to Remain vii. The Dedication of Merit d. Maturing the Siddhi e. Invoking the Blessing The Dissolution 8. The Lineage Prayer Prayer for This Life Prayer for the Bardo Prayer for the Next Life Prayer of Fulfilment 9. Receiving the Four Empowerments 1. The Vase Empowerment 2. The Secret Empowerment 3. The Wisdom Empowerment 4. The Word or Symbolic Empowerment 10. Dedication 11. Special Prayer of Aspiration
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ! From the syllable raṃ (in my speech centre) arises fire, consuming my tongue,
Which is transformed into a three-spoked vajra of red light. 2
In its centre are the vowels and consonants, and around them the mantra of ‘The Essence of Interdependent Origination’: 3
Their syllables are like strings of pearls. From them,
Light streams out, making offerings to the buddhas and bodhisattvas, and pleasing them. 4
As it converges back, all the obscurations of my speech are purified, and
I obtain all the blessings and siddhis of vajra speech.
a ā, i ī, u ū, ṛ ṝ, ḷ ḹ, e ai, o au, aṃ, aḥ
ka kha ga gha ṅa, ca cha ja jha ña, ṭa ṭha ḍa ḍha ṇa, ta tha da dha na, pa pha ba bha ma, ya ra la va śa ṣa sa ha kṣa
oṃ ye dharmā hetu prabhāvā hetuṃ teṣāṃ tathāgato hyavadat teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃ vādī mahāśramaṇaḥ svāhā All dharmas originate from a cause. The Tathāgata has taught this cause. That which brings the cause to cessation—this too, has been taught by the Great Śramaṇaḥ.
oṃ sambhara sambhara vimana sāra mahā-jambha hūṃ
oṃ smara smara vi-manaskāra mahā-java hūṃ
oṃ ruci ramaṇi pravardhanaye svāhā
hrīḥ vajra-jihvā mantra-dhara vardhaṇi oṃ
O lama, care for me!
From the blossoming lotus of devotion at the centre of my heart,
Rise up, O compassionate lama, my only refuge!
I am plagued by past actions and turbulent emotions.
To protect me in my misfortune,
Remain as the jewel ornament on the crown of my head, the chakra of great bliss,
Arousing all my mindfulness and awareness, I pray!
This free and well-favoured human form is difficult to obtain.
Now that you have the chance to realize the full human potential,
If you don’t make good use of this opportunity,
How could you possibly expect to have such a chance again? 5
This existence of ours is as transient as autumn clouds.
To watch the birth and death of beings is like looking at the movement of a dance.
A lifetime is like a flash of lightning in the sky,
Rushing by, like a torrent down a steep mountain. 6
When his time has come, even a king has to die,
And neither his friends nor his wealth can follow him.
So for us—wherever we stay, wherever we go—
Karma follows us like a shadow. 7
Because of craving, attachment and ignorance,
Men, gods, animals, hungry ghosts and hell-beings
Foolishly go round,
Like the turning of a potter’s wheel. 8
Being born in hell, preta or animal realms,
Amidst long-living gods, in uncivilized lands, or with wrong views,
In a world where a buddha has not come, or incapable of understanding:
Now I am free from these ‘eight states where there’s no chance for Dharma practice’.
Born a human being, with all my faculties intact, and in a central land,
My lifestyle not harmful and wrong, and with faith in Buddha’s teaching—
All ‘five personal advantages’ are complete. A buddha has come,
He taught the Dharma, it has survived, I have embraced it, and
A true spiritual friend has accepted me—I have the ‘five advantages due to circumstances’.
Although in a position where I have every one of them,
Once this life, so fraught with uncertainty, is relinquished,
I will go on to yet another realm of existence.
O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards the practice—care for me!
Omniscient masters, Longchenpa and Jikme Lingpa, keep me from straying onto the wrong paths!
Compassionate lama, you who are one with them—care for me!
If I do not seize the opportunity this present freedom offers,
I will not find such a basis for attaining liberation later on.
Once the merit that provided this happy existence is spent,
After death I will wander as a being in the lower realms.
Not knowing good from bad, I will never hear the sound of Dharma,
Nor meet a spiritual friend—a terrible disaster!
Only to think of the numbers and kinds of sentient beings
Is to realize just how slim is the chance of gaining a human body;
And even among human beings—to see how their behaviour is so harmful and contrary to Dharma,
Is to realize that those who really act according to Dharma are as rare as stars in broad daylight.
O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards the practice—care for me!
Omniscient masters, Longchenpa and Jikme Lingpa, keep me from straying onto the wrong paths!
Compassionate lama, you who are one with them—care for me!
Even though I have reached this jewel island, the human body,
A fickle and impetuous mind in such a promising basis
Makes it no good as a foundation for attaining liberation.
Especially when misled by corrupting influences, or with the five poisons raging inside,
When negative karma overtakes me, or I am distracted by laziness,
Like a slave—under someone else’s control, turning to Dharma simply out of insecurity or fear, or merely pretending to practise,
Or chronically senseless and stupid. These are ‘the eight incidental circumstances that make Dharma impossible’:
When they come upon me, menacing my Dharma practice,
O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards the practice—care for me!
Omniscient masters, Longchenpa and Jikme Lingpa, keep me from straying onto the wrong paths!
Compassionate lama, you who are one with them—care for me!
With little renunciation, and without the jewel of devotion,
Caught in the bonds of worldly ties and cravings, or with crude, degenerate behaviour,
Never holding back from negative, harmful actions, and without the slightest real interest,
With vows all broken, and samaya torn to shreds:
These are ‘the eight impossible states where mind cuts us off from the Dharma’:
When they come upon me, menacing my Dharma practice,
O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards the practice—care for me!
Omniscient masters, Longchenpa and Jikme Lingpa, keep me from straying onto the wrong paths!
Compassionate lama, you who are one with them—care for me!
At this moment, I am not ravaged by sickness and pain,
Nor am I a slave or such, under another’s control.
So now that I have this perfect, auspicious quality of total independence,
If I waste the freedom of this human life through my own indolence,
No need to worry about companions, possessions, relatives and loved ones,
When this body I hold so dear
Is carried out alone from its bed to some desolate spot
To be torn to pieces by foxes, vultures and dogs.
Then, in the bardo realm there will be nothing but terror in store.
O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards the practice—care for me!
Omniscient masters, Longchenpa and Jikme Lingpa, keep me from straying onto the wrong paths!
Compassionate lama, you who are one with them—care for me!
The results of beneficial and harmful actions will follow me.
If I am born in the hell realms:
On a floor of burning iron, head and body are hacked with weapons,
Ripped apart with saws, and crushed with red-hot hammers,
Trapped in a doorless iron cell, screaming out loud,
Impaled on red-hot spikes or boiled in molten bronze, and
Burned in a fire of the intensest heat—in the Eight Hot Hells.
On the crests of snow mountains, on precipices of ice,
Terrifying places engulfed by squalls and blizzards of snow,
My tender body, lashed by freezing winds,
Breaks out in blisters, which burst open into festering sores,
In a ceaseless wail of agonized screams
And suffering, hard even think about,
Like a dying person whose strength is all gone,
I let out deep gasps and groans, my teeth clenched. My skin cracks open,
And the raw flesh exposed splits deeper, and yet again—in the Eight Cold Hells.
My feet are cut to ribbons in the ‘Plain of Razor Blades’,
In the ‘Forest of Sword Blades’ my body is gashed and chopped,
I sink into the ‘Swamp of Putrefying Corpses’, and the ‘Pit of Hot Embers’,
All in the ‘Neighbouring Hells’ that ring the Hell of Ultimate Torment. And then the changing, uncertain hells:
Born in a door, a pillar, a fireplace, a rope and the like,
Always made use of and exploited in these ‘Ephemeral Hells’.
When the cause of being born in any of the eighteen hells—
Intense hatred and aggression—arises,
O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards the practice—care for me!
Omniscient masters, Longchenpa and Jikme Lingpa, keep me from straying onto the wrong paths!
Compassionate lama, you who are one with them—care for me!
Likewise, in a grim and destitute realm
Where the words, ‘food’, ‘drink’ or ‘comfort’ have never even been heard,
The pretas find nothing to eat or drink for months and years on end. Their bodies
Are emaciated and they lack even the strength to stand. They suffer from three different kinds of obscurations, 9 and
The reason for being born as one is greed. 10
In constant dread of being killed and eaten by one another,
Exploited and worked until exhaustion, bewildered as to what to do or not to do,
Animals are oppressed by limitless suffering,
The seed of which is stubborn stupidity—when I wander into its darkness,
O Guru Rinpoche, turn my mind towards the practice—care for me!
Omniscient masters, Longchenpa and Jikme Lingpa, keep me from straying onto the wrong paths!
Compassionate lama, you who are one with them—care for me!
Though I have entered the path of the Dharma, I haven’t put a stop to my erring ways.
Though I have entered the door of the Mahāyāna, I am devoid of any beneficial thought for others.
Though I have received the four empowerments, I do not practise the development and completion phases of meditation.
O lama, free me from straying from the path!
Though I have not realized the View, I act as if ‘a master of crazy wisdom’.
Though I am distracted in my Meditation, I let myself get stuck in mental gossip and concepts.
Though it’s my own Actions that are at fault, it’s someone else I blame.
O lama, free me from becoming so arrogant and opinionated, so stubborn and insensitive!
Though I may die tomorrow, I am full of craving for home, clothes and possessions.
Though I am quite old, I’m not mature enough to have the slightest renunciation for saṃsāra.
Though I have truly heard only a little Dharma teaching, I pride myself on all my knowledge.
O lama, free me from such ignorance!
Though I may be rushing into danger, I go Dharma-socializing in crowds and public places, thinking I’m on a pilgrimage.
Though going on solitary retreats, my basic character remains as tough as a block of wood.
Though appearing calm and speaking softly, I haven’t got rid of the attachment and aversion boiling inside.
O lama, free me from these eight worldly concerns! 12
Quickly rouse me from this deep sleep of ignorance!
Quickly set me free from this dismal self-imprisonment!
In the Three Jewels, and their essence, the sugatas, in the three roots: lama, yidam, and khandro,
In the channels, inner air, and bindus, and their nature, the bodhicitta,
In the mandala of essence, nature, and compassion,
I take refuge until enlightenment is fully realized.
Ho! Mesmerized by the sheer variety of perceptions, which are like the illusory reflections of the moon in water,
Beings wander endlessly astray in saṃsāra’s vicious cycle.
In order that they may find comfort and ease in the luminosity and all-pervading space of the true nature of their minds,
I generate the immeasurable love, compassion, joy and equanimity of the awakened mind, the heart of bodhicitta.
Āḥ! I am in my ordinary form. Above my head
On a white lotus, in the centre of a moon-disc seat
Is hūṃ, which becomes the Lama Vajrasattva:
Brilliant white, with complete saṃbhogakāya adornments,
Holding vajra and bell, and embracing the consort Vajragarvā. 13
I take refuge in you and pray—purify all our negative actions!
With the deepest regret I acknowledge them all and ask your forgiveness:
From now on—even if my life is at stake—I shall refrain from indulging in them again.
In your heart, upon a full moon
Is the letter hūṃ, encircled by the mantra.
Reciting the mantra invokes your wisdom mind, and
From the point of union of the blissful play of yab-yum
A cloud of bodhicitta nectar
Flows down like a shining stream of milk. 14 Through this,
For me and all sentient beings of the three worlds
May our negative karma and destructive emotions—the causes of suffering—
Illnesses, harmful influences, negative actions and obscurations, along with wrongdoing, downfalls, and blockages due to breakages of samaya,
Be purified, till not a single one remains!
oṃ vajrasattva samayam anupālaya vajrasattva-tvenopa-tiṣṭha dṛḍho me bhava sutoṣyo me bhava supoṣyo me bhava anurakto me bhava sarva-siddhiṃ me prayaccha sarva-karma śuca me cittaṃ śreyaṅ-kuru hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ bhagavān sarva-tathāgata-vajra mā me muñca vajrī-bhava mahā-samaya-sattva āḥ
O protector! In my ignorance and delusion
I have gone against and corrupted my samaya.
Lama protector, be my refuge!
Chief of all the maṇḍalas, vajra holder,
Embodiment of great compassion:
Chief of all living beings, in you I take refuge! 15
I confess all my impairments of the root and branch samayas of the body, speech and mind.
I implore you: let my negative actions, obscurations, wrongdoing and downfalls—all my flaws—be completely cleansed and purified!
At these words of mine, Vajrasattva is pleased and smiling, says, “Son/daughter of an enlightened family, your negative actions, obscurations, wrongdoing and downfalls are all purified.”
Granting his forgiveness, he melts into light and dissolves into me.
Through this, I too become Vajrasattva, appearing yet empty, like a reflection in a mirror. At my heart is hūṃ, around which the four brilliantly radiant syllables oṃ vajra sattva 16 emanate rays of light.
Whereby the three worlds—the whole universe of the environment and beings within it—attain enlightenment all together as the buddha fields and buddhas of the five families of Vajrasattva.
oṃ vajrasattva hūṃ
Through the positivity and merit of this, may I swiftly
Attain the realization of Vajrasattva, and thereby
Every single sentient being
Reach his state of perfection too.
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ!
One billion universes—a hundred times ten million worlds, 17
Filled with all the wealth of gods and human beings, like the ‘seven precious gems’, 18
My bodies, my possessions, and my sources of merit, all together, I offer them in their entirety, so that
I may be born as a nirmāṇakāya and turn the wheel of Dharma, liberating all beings!
The highest heaven of great bliss, the realm of Ghanavyūha,
Perfect with the five certainties, 19 the mandala of the five buddha families,
And inconceivably vast clouds of offerings of every variety of sensual and emotional stimulants—
With this offering, may I enjoy the perfection of the saṃbhogakāya fields!
Where all appearance and existence are completely pure from the very beginning—the youthful vase body,
Ornamented by the play of dharmatā, unceasing compassion,
The realm where all clinging to the perception of kāyas and tiklés is naturally liberated—
With this wisdom offering, may I enjoy the freedom of the dharmakāya reality!
Phaṭ! By abandoning all attachment to this body held so dear, the demonic forces of seduction through desire 20 are destroyed.
My consciousness shoots out through the ‘aperture of Brahmā’ into all-pervading space, uniting rigpa with space,
Destroys the demonic force of death and transforms into Tröma,
In her right hand, the hooked knife that symbolizes destruction of the demonic force of conflicting emotions. 21
Slicing the top off my corpse’s skull, she destroys the demonic force of the aggregates of ego. 22
Her left hand holds the skullcup to carry out her activity,
Places it on the fireplace of three human heads—representing the three kāyas;
Inside it is the corpse, now an offering as vast as a billion worlds,
Melted into nectar by an ‘A stroke’ and haṃ,
Purified, multiplied and transformed through the power of oṃ āḥ hūṃ.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Phaṭ! The guests above—the root and lineage lamas and yidams—by my offering are pleased,
Whereby merit and wisdom are accumulated, and ordinary and supreme siddhis attained. 23
The guests below, belonging to saṃsāra, are satisfied by my offering; karmic debts are repaid.
In particular, by satisfying malicious and negative forces,
All illnesses, destructive influences, and obstacles are pacified, dissolving into all-pervading space;
Harmful circumstances and clinging to self are exploded.
Finally offering, offerer and guests—all
Dissolve into the nature of Dzogpachenpo, the great simplicity: A
Emaho!
My entire perception, spontaneously perfect, is a realm of infinite purity,
The ‘Copper Coloured Mountain of Glory’, arrayed in complete and perfect detail. Here, in its very centre,
My own body is Vajrayoginī,
With one face and two hands, brilliant red and holding hooked knife and skull,
My two feet gracefully poised, my three eyes gazing into the sky.
Above my head, on a blossoming hundred thousand-petalled lotus, sun and moon disc seat,
Inseparable from my own root master, embodiment of all sources of refuge, appears
Guru Rinpoche, in the supreme nirmāṇakāya form of the ‘Lake-born Vajra’.
His body glows with youth, white with a tinge of red.
He wears a gown, monastic shawl, cloak and robe.
With one face, two hands and seated in royal poise.
In his right hand he holds the vajra, in his left a skullcup containing the vase of immortality.
On his head he wears a five-petalled lotus hat.
Cradled in his left arm he holds the ‘supreme consort’ of bliss and emptiness,
Concealed as the three-pointed khaṭvāṅga trident.
He presides amidst a shimmering aura of rays and rings of rainbow light.
All around him, enveloped in a beautiful lattice of white, blue, yellow, red and green light,
Are King Tri Songdetsen, the twenty-five disciples,
The paṇḍits, siddhas and vidyādharas of India and Tibet, yidam deities,
Ḍākinīs, and dharmapālas and protectors who keep the samaya—all gather like billowing clouds,
Visualized vivid and distinct, in the great equality of clarity and emptiness.
Hūṃ!  In the north-west of the land of Uḍḍiyāna,
In the heart of a lotus flower,
Endowed with the most marvellous attainments,
You are renowned as the ‘Lotus Born’,
Surrounded by many hosts of ḍākinīs.
Following in your footsteps,
I pray to you: Come, inspire me with your blessing!
Hrīḥ!
As many times as there are atoms in the universe,
I multiply my body and offer you prostrations.
With both real offerings and those created in the mind through the power of samādhi,
I offer the entire universe in one vast ‘gesture of offering’.
All the harmful actions of my body, speech and mind,
I confess and purify in the luminosity of dharmakāya.
Whether they be relative or absolute,
I rejoice in all positive, virtuous actions.
According to the receptivity and needs of different beings, 25
I implore you to turn the wheel of Dharma of the three yānas.
Till saṃsāra is completely empty, and all beings liberated,
Do not pass into nirvāṇa, but remain here among us, I pray.
All the merit and positive actions of past, present and future,
I dedicate so that all beings may attain supreme enlightenment.
O Guru Rinpoche, Precious One,
You are the embodiment of
The compassion and blessing of all the buddhas,
The only protector of beings.
My body, my possessions, my heart and soul
Without hesitation, I surrender to you!
From now until I attain enlightenment,
In happiness or sorrow, in circumstances good or bad, in situations high or low:
I rely on you completely, O Pemajungne, you know me!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma siddhi hūṃ
I have no one else to turn to;
In these evil times, the beings of the Kāliyuga
Are sinking in a swamp of intense and unbearable suffering.
Free us from all this, O great Guru!
Grant us the four empowerments, O blessed one!
Direct your realization into our minds, O compassionate one!
Purify our emotional and cognitive obscurations, O powerful one!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma siddhi hūṃ
When my life is at an end,
With my entire perception the heaven of Ngayab Ling—‘the Glorious Copper Coloured Mountain’,
The nirmāṇakāya pure land of indivisible appearance and emptiness—
My body, Vajrayoginī,
Is transformed into a radiant, shimmering sphere of light
And merging, inseparable, with Padmasambhava,
I shall attain buddhahood.
Then, from the play of vast primordial wisdom,
Which is the miraculous manifestation of bliss and emptiness,
For every single being in the three realms,
Let me appear as their true guide, to lead them to liberation—
Jetsün Padma, grant this, I pray!
I pray to you from the bottom of my heart,
It’s not just words or empty mouthings:
Grant your blessings from the depth of your wisdom mind,
And cause all my good aspirations to be fulfilled, I pray !
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma siddhi hūṃ
Emaho!
In the heavenly realm, free from all dimensions and extremes,
Is the Primordial Buddha, the dharmakāya Samantabhadra;
His wisdom play, like the reflection of the moon in water, the saṃbhogakāya Vajrasattva;
Perfect with all buddha qualities, nirmāṇakāya Garab Dorje;
To you I pray: Grant me your blessings and empowerment!
Śrī Siṃha, treasure of the ultimate Dharma;
Mañjuśrīmitra, universal ruler of the Nine Yānas;
Jñānasūtra, great paṇḍita Vimalamitra;
To you I pray: Show me the way to make my mind free!
Padmasambhava, sole ornament of this world of ours,
Your supreme heart-disciples, Tri Songdetsen, Vairotsana, and Yeshe Tsogyal;
Longchenpa, who revealed a vast ocean of wisdom mind treasures;
Jikme Lingpa, entrusted with the space treasury of the ḍākinīs;
To you I pray: Grant me fruition and liberation!
Master of the Dharma, Changchub Dorje; 26
The siddha, Jikme Gyalwe Nyugu;
Supreme among emanations, Mingyur Namkhe Dorje;
Son of the buddhas, Shenpen Thaye;
To you I pray: Show me my true nature, my original face!
Glorious heruka, Do Khyentse Yeshe Dorje;
Patrul Rinpoche, Orgyen Jikme Chökyi Wangpo;
Lord of siddhas, Padma Vajra;
Padmasambhava himself, great Khyentse Wangpo;
To you I pray: Grant me siddhis, ordinary and supreme!
Natsok Rangdrol, 27 who self-liberated all the phenomena of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa;
Omniscient Jikme Tenpe Nyima;
Embodiment of all sources of refuge, Chökyi Lodrö;
To you I pray: Bless my mind, inspire my understanding!
Through true renunciation and disgust for saṃsāra,
May I rely upon my vajra lama meaningfully, as though he were my very eyes,
Following his instructions to the letter, and taking to heart the profound practices he gives,
Not just now and then, but with diligent and constant application,
May I become worthy of the transmission of his profound wisdom mind!
Since all that appears and exists, saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, from the very beginning is the Akaniṣṭha pure realm of the buddhas,
Where all appearance is liberated into perfect buddha forms; all sounds are purified into mantra; all thoughts are matured into dharmakāya;
And since Dzogpachenpo is free of any effort of abandoning and adopting,
And since rigpa’s self-radiance is beyond thoughts and experience,
May I see the naked reality of dharmatā!
May all ordinary clinging to reality be totally liberated into rainbow light,
And the experiences of kāyas and tiklés increase!
May rigpa’s strength be enhanced, maturing into the fullness of saṃbhogakāya perfection!
As all perception of phenomenal reality wears out, and the conceptual mind dies into the state of total enlightenment,
May I gain the stronghold of the youthful vase body, free from birth and death!
But if I am not able to master the practice of the great Atiyoga in this life,
And this gross physical body is not liberated into the pure space of the rainbow body,
Then, when the constituents that form this life fall apart—
At the moment of death may the ground luminosity arise as the dharmakāya, pure from the beginning;
May appearances of the bardo experience be liberated into saṃbhogakāya forms;
And, perfecting the path of trekchö and tögal,
May I be liberated, as naturally as a child running into its mother’s lap!
In this great secret mantrayāna path of luminosity—Dzogpachenpo—the summit of all,
Enlightenment is to be sought nowhere but in the face of the dharmakāya.
If I'm not liberated into the primordial state by actualizing this,
Then, by taking the sublime path of the five practices of ‘enlightenment without meditation’, 28
May I be born in one of the naturally emanated realms of the five buddha families, 29
And especially in the ‘Palace of Lotus Light’, the Zangdokpalri heaven of Guru Rinpoche,
In the presence of the Lord of Orgyen himself, chief of the ocean of vidyādhara masters,
While he is celebrating the feast of the great secret mantra Dharma,
Let me be born as his favourite son or daughter,
To take upon myself the task of helping limitless beings!
Through the inspiration and blessing of the ocean of victorious vidyādharas,
By the truth of the dharmadhātu, beyond conception,
And with this free and well-favoured human form, may I train in the three activities of perfecting, ripening and purifying,
And by actualizing this auspicious interconnection, attain the state of buddhahood!
From the letter oṃ in the Guru’s 30 forehead, radiant and shimmering like moonlight,
Rays of light stream out and enter my forehead.
Negative actions of the body and obscurations of the channels 31 are purified.
The blessing of the vajra body of the buddhas infuses me,
The vase empowerment is obtained,
I become a receptive vessel for the generation phase of kyerim.
The seed of the ‘completely matured vidyādhara’ 32 is sown.
The potential for obtaining the level of nirmāṇakāya is implanted within me.
From the letter āḥ in his throat, blazing like a ruby,
Rays of light streak out and penetrate my throat.
Negative activity of the speech and obscurations of the inner air 33 are purified,
The blessing of the vajra speech of the buddhas enters me,
The secret empowerment is obtained,
I become a receptive vessel for mantra recitation practice.
The seed of the ‘vidyādhara with power over life’ is sown.
The potential for obtaining the level of saṃbhogakāya is implanted within me.
At his heart, from the letter hūṃ, sky-coloured rays of light
Pour out and plunge into my heart.
Negative activity of the mind and obscurations of the tikle are purified.
The blessing of the vajra mind of all the buddhas is instilled in me,
The wisdom empowerment is obtained,
I become a receptive vessel for the caṇḍāli practice of bliss and emptiness.
The seed of the ‘mahāmudrā vidyādhara’ is sown.
The potential for obtaining the level of dharmakāya is implanted within me.
Again, from hūṃ in his heart, a second letter hūṃ bursts out like a shooting star
And merges indistinguishably one with my own mind.
The karma of the ‘ground of all’ 34 and cognitive obscurations are purified,
The blessing of the vajra wisdom pervades me,
The absolute empowerment, symbolized by the word, is obtained.
I become a receptive vessel for the primordial purity of Dzogpachenpo,
The seed of the ‘spontaneously accomplished vidyādhara’ is sown.
The potential for the svabhāvikakāya—the final fruition—is implanted within me.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma siddhi hūṃ
I visualize myself clearly as Vajrayoginī. From the heart-centre of the lama a beam of light, red and warm, suddenly bursts out and touches my heart. Instantaneously I am transformed into a sphere of red light the size of a pea, which shoots up towards Padmasambhava, like a spark that spits from the fire. It dissolves into Guru Rinpoche’s heart, merges and becomes one with him: one taste.
Glorious root lama, precious one,
Dwell on the lotus-seat in the depth of my heart,
Look upon me with the grace of your great compassion,
Grant me the attainments of body, speech and mind!
Towards the lifestyle and activity of the lama,
May wrong view not arise for even an instant, and
May I see whatever he does as a teaching for me.
Through such devotion, may his blessing inspire and fill my mind!
In all my lives, may I never be separated from the perfect lama,
And having benefited fully from the splendour of the Dharma,
May I perfect the qualities of the five paths and ten bhūmis,
And swiftly attain the sublime level of Vajradhara!
Through this merit, may all beings
Complete the accumulations of merit and wisdom,
And so attain the dharmakāya and rūpakāya
That come from merit and wisdom. 36
Through all the merit that beings have—
Whatever they have done, will do and are doing now—
May they attain the very same stages of perfection
As Samantabhadra did.
Just as the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī knew to be the way,
And Samantabhadra too,
I shall follow in the footsteps of all the bodhisattvas,
And make a perfect dedication of these merits.
As all buddhas, past, present and future,
Praise the dedication of merit as supreme,
All my sources of merit I dedicate completely
So that all may perfect Samantabhadra’s ‘Good Actions’. 37
In all my lives, wherever I am born,
May I obtain the seven qualities of birth in higher realms. 38
As soon as I am born, may I meet the Dharma,
And have the freedom to practise it correctly.
Then, may I please the noble lama,
And put the Dharma into action day and night.
May I realize the Dharma, actualize its innermost meaning,
And so cross the ocean of existence in this very life.
May I teach the sacred Dharma to beings wandering in saṃsāra,
And never tire or weary of working to help others.
Through my vast and impartial service to others,
May all beings attain buddhahood together, as one!