A Shower of Blessings A Guru Yoga Practice to Accompany the Seven-Line Prayer Refuge and Bodhicitta Offering a Torma to the Obstructing Forces and Visualizing the Protective Tent Descent of Blessings Main Part: Generating the Deity Conclusion Blessing the Feast Offering The Invitation of the Guests and the Offering of the Feast Offering the Remainder Aspiration Dedication of Merit and Prayers of Prosperity and Auspiciousness
Hūṃ! Lake-born Padmasambhava, empty awareness in essence,
You are the essential embodiment of all sources of refuge; I take refuge you.
May all beings bound to this life’s fleeting delusions
Naturally dispel their delusion and gain liberation in the primordially pure expanse.
Hūṃ! Evil forces of ignorance, dualistic perception, and delusion,
Take this torma, and vanish into the realm beyond all extremes.
Within the unchanging realm of naturally aware wisdom,
The primordial expanse beyond the three spheres, the boundary is set!
vajra-jñāna rakṣa rakṣa
Hūṃ! From the pure land of blissfully swirling lotuses,
Let the blessings of the Lake-born Vajradhara, three kāyas’ spontaneous presence,
Now descend; bestow us with the ordinary and supreme siddhis!
These offerings become ornaments of Samantabhadra’s display!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma tötreng tsal vajra-samaya jaḥ | avaśaya avaśaya a a āḥ | oṃ vajra-pūja-megha-samudra hūṃ hrīḥ thā |
Ah! I am in my ordinary form; before me, in the sky
Appears Oḍḍiyāna, and the immaculate Dhanakośa lake,
Deep and full of water with eight kinds of purity.
In its centre you dwell, on a jewelled lotus blossom, its petals open wide:
All sources of refuge combined, Orgyen Dorje Chang,
Ablaze in splendour with the major and minor marks of perfection, and embracing the consort Yeshe Tsogyal.
You hold a vajra in your right hand, a skull cup containing a vase in your left,
Beautiful in all your silk, jewel and bone ornaments.
In an expanse of blue, white, yellow, red and green light, you preside resplendent, radiating great bliss.
All around you, gurus, devas and ḍākinīs gather like clouds.
Pour down your blessings in a rain of compassion: watch over and care for me!
Essence of all buddhas, in your immortal wisdom body,
Now and always, I bow to you with passionate longing and devotion.
My bodies, possessions and all my merit, past, present and future
I visualize as Samantabhadra’s offering clouds, and present them to you.
My harmful actions and downfalls, committed through beginningless time, I confess without exception.
You alone have completely mastered the precious qualities of all the buddhas and bodhisattvas,
And with all my heart I rejoice at your liberating life story.
With total trust I pray to you,
And implore you: shower down a great rain of Dharma, profound and vast.
Gathering all the actual merit of myself and others,
For as long as these infinite realms of living beings remain
I shall follow your example, Lord,
And dedicate it all to guiding beings as limitless as space.
You are all my sources of refuge in one, a great treasure of wisdom and love,
Our precious, our greatest, protection in this dark age, the dregs of time.
Tormented and drained by the five kinds of degeneration, when I call on you
In desperate yearning, look upon your child with all the love of your wisdom mind.
Let the power of your compassion burst out from your vast expanse of realization,
And flood my devoted heart with your blessing.
Quickly show me the signs and marks of attainment,
And grant me siddhis, ordinary and supreme.
Hūṃ! In the north-west of the land of Oḍḍiyāna,
In the heart of a lotus flower,
Endowed with the most marvellous attainments,
You are renowned as the Lotus-born,
Surrounded by many hosts of ḍākinīs.
Following in your footsteps
I pray to you: come and bless me with your grace!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma siddhi hūṃ
From the three syllables oṃ āḥ hūṃ at the three centres of the guru,
White, red and blue rays of light strike out
And dissolve into my own three centres, purifying the obscurations
Of my body, speech and mind, and transforming them into vajra body, speech and mind.
Finally, the guru and his retinue melt into light
And into a red and white bindu marked with hūṃ,
That dissolves into my heart, through which the guru’s wisdom mind
And my own mind merge inseparably, and so I abide in the ever-present dharmakāya.
a āḥ
Hūṃ. With āḥ appears a skullcup, as vast as the space of dharmadhātu,
With oṃ, all appearance and existence are displayed as the feast offerings
With hūṃ, they transform into the wisdom play of great bliss,
With hrīḥ, gurus, devas and ḍākinīs, all the deities gathered, are pleased and satisfied.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ hrīḥ
Hūṃ! In the north-west of the land of Oḍḍiyāna,
In the heart of a lotus flower,
Endowed with the most marvellous attainments,
You are renowned as the Lotus-born,
Surrounded by many hosts of ḍākinīs.
Following in your footsteps,
We invite you to this feast of desirable offerings,
So come now, bless us with your grace!
Pour down your blessings on this sublime place,
Transform the gaṇacakra offerings into wisdom nectar,
Grant us, the supreme practitioners, the four empowerments,
Dispel obstructors, negative forces and obstacles
And confer siddhis, ordinary and supreme.
Hūṃ! Beloved master Pema Tötrengtsal,
With your throng of vidyādharas and ḍākinīs,
Encompassing the three roots in this maṇḍala of the buddhas,
In deep devotion, with fervent yearning, I pray to you.
All the merit of my and others’ body, speech and mind, our wealth,
And everything desirable in the universe, every source of pleasure and enjoyment with nothing left out,
I offer as Samantabhadra’s unending gaṇacakra of great bliss.
With all your compassion and love, accept them with delight, so your heart’s wishes are fulfilled.
Guru Rinpoche, I pray to you;
Vidyādharas and ḍākinīs, inspire me with your blessings;
Grant this devoted disciple attainments, ordinary and supreme;
Let all my impairments and breakages of samaya be healed, I pray.
Obstacles outer, inner and secret—liberate them all into dharmadhātu.
Until I realize enlightenment, hold me close, without ever parting,
Like the waxing moon let my lifespan, merit, experience and realization grow ever greater,
And bless me so that all my aspirations spontaneously come true.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma siddhi hūṃ
Hosts of arrogant worldly spirits who collect the remainders,
Please accept this remainder torma of the five sensual delights,
And carry out beneficial and favorable activities!
oṃ ucchiṣṭa-baliṅte khāhi
By making this feast offering
To the maṇḍala of the Lake-born Guru,
May I and every single other sentient being
Attain realization within a single maṇḍala!
Hūṃ! From the space-like expanse of the unborn dharmakāya
The unobstructed form of the deity appears
And dissolves within the empty clarity beyond limits.
a āḥ
I dedicate these roots of merit to great awakening.
Essence, nature, and compassionate energy
Are the Lake-born Lord, the Guru of Oḍḍiyāna.
May the spontaneous presence of the three kāyas
Yield the bliss and excellence of sublime auspiciousness!