Bestowing the Glory of Wisdom A Gaṇacakra Feast for Nyingtik Saldrön
Raṃ yaṃ khaṃ! Outer appearance is the kapāla of great bliss;
Within it, all beings are the great feast tormas 1 of wisdom.
Objects of desire multiply as great clouds of stainless amṛta,
Increasing until they fill the sky.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ ha ho hrīḥ
From the infinite pure realm of the three kāyas,
Come, assemblies of gurus, devas and ḍākinīs.
Rain blessings upon this gaṇacakra.
Heighten this yogin’s experience and realisation of awareness.
Bless nāḍī, prāṇa and bindu,
And bestow supreme and ordinary siddhis.
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ! These unexcelled gaṇacakra offerings are
Radiant with the five wisdom lights;
May the maṇḍalas of the guru’s four kāyas
Be pleased by this offering of gaṇacakra.
Hūṃ! Hrīḥ! In the great supreme secret buddha field of Akaniṣṭha,
Within the bhāṇḍa 2 of all-pervading space,
The feast tormas and offerings are excellent,
And the yogin’s awareness is clear and joyful.
Awareness-display pervades the sky as an offering cloud of Samantabhadra,
Making limitless outer, inner, and secret offerings
To the devas of the guru’s four kāyas;
The deities are pleased and their wishes fulfilled.
Unwholesome actions, obscurations, faults and downfalls,
Accumulated through my ignorance and stupidity,
I confess through this feast offering of samaya substances;
Please grant me purification!
vajra samaya aḥ
Into the triangular blazing dungeon of the space of E,
I summon the rudra, dualistic thought;
Liberating it with the kīla of egolessness,
I offer it to the mouth of intensely blazing wisdom.
Hoḥ! Assemblies of vidyādhara gurus—
Through offering this gaṇacakra,
May I, and all beings without exception,
Attain accomplishment within one maṇḍala.
Phaiṃ! Attendants entitled to the remainder—
Ḍākinīs, gings 3 , langkaras and īśvarīs,
Seven Mothers, Four Sisters, barmas and the rest—
Enjoy the remainder and accomplish your appointed activities!
Hūṃ! Hrīḥ! You protectors bound by oath
By the gurus of the three lineages—
Be pleased with these nectars of amṛta and rakta;
Accept this torma of the obstacle makers’ flesh and blood;
Liberate unfavourable circumstances and obstacles;
Cause the teachings of the profound treasures to spread,
And perform the activities we request of you!
samaya amṛta rakta baliṃ te khāhi
Bhyoḥ! The innate purity of the twelve interdependent links
Arises in the form of the twelve aspects of truth;
You twelve Tenmas, protectresses of the world—
Come here and receive the torma’s rinse water.
Accomplish your appointed activities,
Increase the happiness of the world,
And at all times keep guard and protect!
ma mā hrīṃ hrīṃ baliṃ te khāhi
Hūṃ! The great vajra commander
Gathers all you violators of samaya;
Burying you beneath blazing Mount Meru,
Never shall you rise again!
Hoḥ! Before this divine assembly of vidyādhara gurus,
I present the outer, inner and secret offerings;
Within the realm of non-fixation, free from acceptance and rejection,
Accept this non-dual enjoyment of objects and senses.
Hūṃ! Hrīḥ! Never departing from the realm of self-existing luminosity,
You manifest the unceasing saṃbhogakāya,
And the all-taming deities of the compassionate nirmāṇakāya;
With unchanging great equanimity, I praise you.
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ! The time has come to fulfil the aspirations of the vidyādhara gurus.
By opening the door of the great wisdom of bliss-emptiness,
Grant and stabilise right now, without exception,
All supreme and ordinary siddhis!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra mahā guru kāya vāk citta sarva siddhi phala hūṃ 4
May I and all beings numerous as the sky is vast,
Be accepted by the guru in all our lives.
May our mindstreams be rich with the nectar of maturation and liberation,
And may we all swiftly attain the level of the four kāyas.
From the dense rain-clouds of the gurus of the three lineages,
Devas pour down siddhis
Amidst the roaring thunder of ḍākinīs and dharmapālas.
May the virtues of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa flourish!