The Dhāraṇī “Vanquishing Constraints of Body, Speech and Mind”
In the language of India: Kāya-vak-citta-stambhana-vijayā dhāraṇī
In the language of Tibet: Lü ngak yi sum chingpa lé rabtu gyalwar jepa zhé chawé zung
In the English language: The Dhāraṇī “Vanquishing Constraints of Body, Speech and Mind”
Homage to the Blessed Omniscient King!
Indra, King of the Gods, implored the Blessed One in the Palace of Victory: 1
O Noble One, Bhagavan, you are our omniscient leader! Please liberate my body, speech and mind from the constraints imposed by the asuras. 2
The Blessed One replied: Indra, I shall grant what you have requested. Therefore listen well, remember my words, and diligently apply what I now share: When your body, speech and mind are constrained, you will never feel at comfort or ease. When this is the case, because all the fruits derived from the strength of this vidyā-mantra, 3 the power of meditation, and from the two accumulations are led to decline, the resultant supramundane qualities, merits, and bliss will never be experienced. It’s similar to how the sun’s rays may shine in abundance but still be obstructed by clouds. Earnestly apply yourself, therefore, to this method for liberating oneself from any constraints of body, speech and mind. So free yourself from bondage or constraint, for, like a candle dispelling darkness, a flame instantly illuminating the night, or the lion’s roar that overwhelms all other animals, the blessings of this great vidyā-mantra will certainly liberate them all. The steps are as follows:
oṃ hrīḥ vajra-jvala sarva-karma |
Liberate my body, speech and mind from any spells, curses, constraints, hindrances, and impediments!
oṃ vajra-cchindaya ha he hūṃ phaṭ |
Defeat all our opponents’ evil schemes!
oṃ mama sarva bhindha bhindha | jaye jaye | vijaye vijaye | ajite aparājitaye mama vaśyapa madha haye ma ma hūṃ phaṭ |
All harmful intentions and evil thoughts directed at you are pacified by this great unassailable vidyā-mantra!
oṃ śāntiṅ-kariye mama vajra | jñāna-prayacchayaṃ | mama vidharaya | ha ha he he hi hi hūṃ hūṃ | prakaraṇa sarva-cala sarva-vajra-rakṣaḥ rakṣaḥ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā ||
Indra, the benefits of this great vidyā-mantra are as follows:
The body, speech, and mind of whoever bears this cakra will be freed from all constraints, and their capabilities and powers will increase.
Even if the shadow or a breeze passing the body of anyone bearing this cakra touches another, their body, speech and mind will likewise be freed from constraints.
If this cakra is placed upon a victory banner and hoisted atop the highest building in the centre of the capital, then likewise, the body, speech and mind of whoever is touched by its shadow or a breeze passing by the banner will be freed from constraints.
The body, speech, and mind of whoever drinks water from a well, spring, pool, waterfall, pond, or lake reflecting the letters or form of the cakra will be freed from all constraints.
Anyone who places this cakra above their doors, under their umbrellas, inside their hats, or on their collars, will remain under its protection and therefore be liberated from constraints.
Therefore, retain this great vidyā-mantra well.
Indra then said:
O Blessed Teacher,
Majestic King of Vidyās,
You have excellently expressed something beneficial to all.
This supreme vidyā-mantra will be honoured and praised!
Indra and his entire retinue rejoiced and praised the speech of the Blessed One.
Thus concludes the dhāraṇī “Vanquishing Constraints of Body, Speech and Mind”