King Gesar’s Self-Generation and Recitation Practice Self-Generation Stage Mantra Completion Stage Dedication Prayer of Auspiciousness
Great King Gesar, your entire body, speech, and mind’s spiritual qualities permeate my mind stream. I supplicate, please bestow the blessing to accomplish the vast benefit of the Buddhadharma and sentient beings.
From the three places of the great King Gesar’s body, white, red, and blue lights dissolve into my own three places. And I obtain the body, speech and mind empowerments, blessings and siddhis without exception.
Again, red light shoots out from the deity’s navel centre, like streaks of red lightning with the nature of great bliss.
The light touches me, and the three doors of my body—the defiled aggregates—dissolve into the state of luminosity like a disappearing rainbow.
After that, instantly like a fish leaping from the water, I manifest as the Great Lion King—Gesar. From my three places marked with oṃ āḥ hūṃ , lights radiate. The jñānasattva (wisdom being) similar to myself, the visualized being, is invited and becomes inseparable with the samayasattva (samaya being).
Inside my heart is a red jewel blazing with lights. On top of a full moon disc, a white hūṃ is encircled by a mantra garland. From there, lights radiate to make offering to the noble beings and purify sentient beings’ obscurations.
Everything—appearances, sounds, thoughts—extends boundlessly into the state of the deity, mantra, and dharmatā.
From all those arise countless multitudes of lights as forms, mantra garlands and emblems. They dissolve into myself, and I achieve all the ordinary and supreme siddhis without exception.
oṃ guru maṇi-rāja siddhi hūṃ
After reciting Hūṃ Hūṃ Hūṃ , everything—the universe and its inhabitants—melts into light and dissolves into me. I too then dissolve into the expanse of luminosity and great bliss, free from reference.
Suddenly, I manifest once again as the illusion-like body of the Great King Gesar.
Through this merit, may all sentient beings
Perfect the two accumulations of merit and wisdom.
And may they attain the two sacred kāyas 1
That arise from merit and wisdom.
Ho! May the blessing of the root and lineage gurus enter our hearts.
May we be embraced by the yidams and attain siddhis.
May ḍākinīs and oath-bound protectors keep us company just as a shadow follows the body.
May we have the fortune whereby all wishes are spontaneously fulfilled!