Clarifying the Self-Initiation An Empowerment of the Great Compassionate One, the Natural Liberation of Suffering I. The Preliminaries II. The Main Part The Self-Initiation Granting the Empowerments i. Vase Empowerment ii. Secret Empowerment iii. Knowledge-Wisdom Empowerment iv. Fourth Empowerment III. The Concluding Stages
Homage to the compassionate Noble One!
aḥ khaṃ vīra
Omniscient one, embodiment of primordial wisdom, 1
Who thoroughly purifies the wheel of existence—
Lord, with your kindness, grant me this precious treasure
Of which you have spoken today. 2
Hoḥ. I prostrate to the vajra master,
Glorious embodiment of the buddhas of past, present and future!
With a mind free from all duality,
I take refuge in the Three Jewels, the objects of reliance!
I request that you accept these pure offerings,
Both actual and envisioned.
My faults, the hindrances that cut the flow of accomplishments, 3
I confess without exception.
In all those actions throughout the ten directions done without attachment
And free from concepts of subject, object and action, I rejoice!
I awaken the perfect mind set upon awakening,
Pure and untainted by the four extremes.
To the bliss-gone ones, 4 mighty lords and sentient beings.
I offer my body for the threefold purpose.
Gathering the merits accumulated throughout all my lives,
I dedicate them to supreme enlightenment!
I take the Great Compassionate One as my supreme source of refuge.
For the benefit of beings, I generate the bodhicitta of aspiration and action.
I will always maintain the samaya vows of the Secret Mantra Vehicle:
Those of the enlightened body, speech, mind and union.
samaya praveśaya hūṃ
oṃ nama te hūṃ
oṃ nama me hūṃ
oṃ namo nama hūṃ
The main deity is placed near the eastern door of the maṇḍala upon an empowerment platform with an eight-petalled lotus.
From his heart arise rays of light that purify your body of karmic ripening.
Your consciousness transforms into a white syllable hrīḥ. Flowing through the shape of your body it exits through your mouth
And enters the secret space of Tārā, residing in front of you. You are born from bliss and emptiness as her son and return to your seat.
Clearly appearing as the Great Compassionate One, your three centres are marked by the three syllables. From them light radiates in the ten directions, inviting the tathāgatas and their heirs. Consider that they dissolve into you, transforming your body, speech and mind into the three vajras.
pratīccha vajra hoḥ
prati gṛhaṇa imam satva mahābala
Hoḥ. My buddha nature is obscured by the eight consciousnesses
And blinded by the cataract of ignorance.
Remove them with the scalpel of wisdom
And reveal the three doors of liberation!
jñāna cakṣu praveśaya phaṭ
Hūṃ. In the divine palace of the auspicious vase
Is the amṛta water indivisible from the deities,
Through which you, fortunate child, are empowered.
May clinging to appearances be perfected as the mudrā of the deities' form,
So that you attain the level of a matured vidyādhara
And reach the stage of Universal Radiance.
kayābhiṣiñca muṃ
With this, the body and obscurations of the channels are purified.
The blessing of the vajra-body has entered you
And you received the vase empowerment.
You have become a suitable vessel for generation phase practice.
The seed of the matured vidyādhara has been planted within you.
You have gained the fortune to realize the nirmāṇakāya.
Hūṃ. Red and white bodhicitta flows from the point of union
Of the male deity and consort, and fills the skull-cup.
With it, fortunate child, you are empowered.
May your channels and elements be matured into syllables,
So that you attain the level of a vidyādhara with power over life
And reach the stage of the Lotus of Non-Attachment.
vākābhiṣiñca muṃ
With this, karma of the speech and obscurations of the wind-energy are purified.
The blessing of vajra-speech has entered you
And you received the secret empowerment.
You have become a suitable vessel for mantra recitation.
The seed of the vidyādhara with power over life is planted within you.
You have gained the fortune to realize the saṃbhogakāya.
Hūṃ. The source of all phenomena
Is the secret mother-consort of great bliss.
By presenting her to you, fortunate child,
May you actualize the wisdom of the four joys,
So that you attain the level of a mahāmudrā vidyādhara
And reach the stage of Great Cloud Mass of Rotating Syllables! 5
cittābhiṣiñca muṃ
With this, karma of the mind and obscurations of the essences are purified.
The blessing of vajra-mind has entered you
And you received the insight-wisdom empowerment.
You have become a suitable vessel for the bliss-emptiness of caṇḍāli practice.
The seed of the mahāmudrā vidyādhara is planted within you.
You have gained the fortune to realize the dharmakāya.
Hoḥ. On the surface of the clear mirror of primordial purity
The stainless crystal of spontaneous presence is reflected.
Through this empowerment in which symbolic indications are complete,
May you realize the natural state of immaculate awareness,
So that you attain the level of a spontaneously accomplished vidyādhara
And reach the stage of great bliss.
dharmadhātu-abhiṣiñca muṃ
With this, karma of the all-ground and cognitive obscurations are purified.
The blessing of vajra-wisdom has entered you
And you have received the absolute empowerment that is illustrated with words.
You have become a suitable vessel for the primordial purity of the Great Perfection.
The seed of the spontaneously accomplished vidyādhara is planted within you.
You have gained the fortune to realize ultimate fruition of the svabhāvikakāya.
All the supreme root samayas of body, speech and mind,
The twenty-five branch samayas,
And the Great Perfection samayas such as absence, oneness, and suffusion,
I pledge to maintain in the proper way.
Whatever the guru, chief of the maṇḍala, commands,
I shall carry out—each and every instruction.
I offer myself to you completely.
Please take me as your disciple and make use of me.