Waves in A Sea of Devotion A Prayer to the Garland of Zurmang Trungpa Rinpoche Incarnations
Oṃ svasti!
Supreme sovereign of a hundred devas in Tuṣita,
Magnificent Maitreya, great loving guardian of beings,
Dharma regent, great heir to the conquerors,
Buddha of the future, to you I pray.
Born into the warrior class, you won attainment through Hevajra,
And with the conduct of a great lord of yogis,
Miraculously riding upon a tiger, gained victory over all—
Ḍombī Heruka, at your feet I pray.
In the fine mansion of the Vajra Pinnacle of Clear Light,
You arose in the form of a greatly accomplished vidyādhara,
A guardian of the sun-like teachings of the supreme vehicle—
Śrī Siṃha, at your feet I pray.
Heart son, blessed by the Great One of Oḍḍiyāna, 1
Your vajra arrow struck the evil-doing king,
For you were Vajrapāṇi himself in human guise—
Palgyi Dorje, 2 at your feet I pray.
You realized the non-duality of wind-energy and mind,
And self-liberated all the phenomena of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa as Mahāmudrā,
Never lapsing from that state—Drugu Repa, 3
Lord of siddhas, at your feet I pray.
You followed a supreme guru, received profound instructions,
Practised them precisely, so that appearances arose as dharmakāya;
And your own mind, too, you realized as unborn dharmakāya—
Lhopa Gomchung, 4 at your feet I pray.
Born into the Nyö clan as an heir to the victorious,
Your power of realization was perfected in knowledge of sūtra and mantra,
And you rose to the crest of an ocean of the learned and accomplished,
Tingma Sangye Drak, 5 at your feet I pray.
Heart-son of Lodrö Rinchen, the great siddha of the practice lineage,
Through the great transmission of definitive realization,
You attained the kingdom of dharmakāya beyond meditation—
Kunga Gyaltsen, 6 at your feet I pray.
In Tserlung you planted the victory banner of accomplishment,
And Mahākāla repeatedly revealed to you his joyful face,
Supreme sovereign of oceanic power and capacity—
Kunga Zangpo, 7 at your feet I pray.
Outwardly, you nurtured the conduct of a śrāvaka,
Inwardly, you assimilated the two kinds of bodhicitta,
Secretly, you bound the dharmas of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa within the central channel—
Kunga Özer, 8 at your feet I pray.
You clearly perceived all knowable things in their infinity,
And held fast the pure aspects of channels, energies and essences,
Great leader among the siddhas of Cakrasaṃvara—
Kunga Namgyal, 9 at your feet I pray.
Pre-eminent amidst the oceanic lineage of practice,
You perfected study, contemplation and meditation, realized suchness,
And acquired the most excellent attainment of perfect wisdom—
Tenpa Namgyal, 10 at your feet I pray.
All the rivers of the lineage of fourfold transmission 11 merged
Within the ocean of your mind and your brought disciples to maturity,
Arriving at the highest realization of the paths and stages—
Tendzin Chökyi Gyatso, 12 at your feet I pray.
You acquired the treasure-like instructions of the aural lineage,
Raised the jewelled victory banner of the two kinds of siddhi,
And guided the fortunate along the excellent path to the four kāyas—
Jampal Chökyi Gyatso, 13 at your feet I pray.
Foremost among millions of holders of the Karma Kagyü teachings,
You actualized the signs of the path to accomplishing the profound secret,
And held the perfect strength to act for the benefit of beings—
Gyurme Tenpel, 14 at your feet I pray.
You became the heart-son of the Karmapa,
With your vision that perfectly beheld the truth of the definitive meaning,
Lord of Dharma, you propagated the aural lineage that matures and liberates—
Tenpa Tagyé, 15 at your feet I pray.
One and only heart-son of the Mañjughoṣa guru, 16
Sublime leader of the learned and accomplished,
Holder of the vital of the aural transmission of Karma Kagyü—
Chökyi Nyinché, 17 at your feet I pray.
In your mind you recalled previous states in the play of rebirth,
As learned and accomplished masters of Old and New Schools,
Including as the lord of yogis, Kunga Lekpa—
Glorious, all-encompassing guru, to you I pray.
Conquerors’ heir, great moon of compassion,
In whom the potential of the enlightened family is fully present,
Skilled follower of the Great Vehicle’s excellent path to victory—
Karma Trinlé Kunkhyab, 18 I pray that your life may remain secure.
Thus, before this assembly of root and lineage gurus,
I devotedly pay homage, make offerings, confess my misdeeds and downfalls,
Rejoice in virtue, request the turning of the Wheel of Dharma,
Beseech you not to pass into nirvāṇa but remain, and dedicate stores of virtue.
May the hosts of beings who extend even unto the limits of space
Purify obscurations, perfect the accumulations, and attain the four kāyas.
From now until I and others reach the essence of awakening,
May the glorious guru guide us without ever parting!