The Summoning of Blessings Which Brings Them Swift and Fast
Hūṃ!   From the space of the dharmadhātu, rise up
Peaceful and wrathful sugatas, and shower down your blessing!
From the eight charnel grounds, rise up,
O vidyādharas, and shower down your blessing!
From the realm of Ngayab Ling, rise up
Dorjé Tötreng, and shower down your blessing!
From the land of Orgyen, rise up
Host of ḍākinīs, and shower down your blessing!
From the highest reaches of space, rise up
Vajra piśācīs, and shower down your blessing!
From the peaks of the white snow mountains, rise up
Great vajra kiṃkaras, and shower down your blessing!
From the depths of the oceans, rise up
Ḍākinīs of the islands, and shower down your blessing!
In the practice places of India, of Nepal and Tibet,
Master Padmākara, you attained
The siddhis of the eight sugatas of Kagyé
And of Vajrakīla; in the same way
Pour down your blessings on us here now!
Grant us the attainments, ordinary and supreme!
Hūṃ!   On one thousand realms in the centre, where
All forms perceived are the deities of Kīla,
All sounds are Buddhakīla:
Shower down the wisdom mind blessing of the sugatas!
On one thousand realms in the east, where
All forms perceived are the deities of Kīla,
All sounds are Vajrakīla:
Shower down the wisdom body blessing of the sugatas!
On one thousand realms in the south, where
All forms perceived are the deities of Kīla,
All sounds are Ratnakīla:
Shower down the blessing of noble qualities of the sugatas!
On one thousand realms in the west, where
All forms perceived are the deities of Kīla,
All sounds are Padmakīla:
Shower down the wisdom speech blessing of the sugatas!
On one thousand realms in the north, where
All forms perceived are the deities of Kīla,
All sounds are Karmakīla:
Shower down the blessing of the enlightened activity of the sugatas!
Peaceful and wrathful deities of the sugatas of five families,
Buddhas of the three times, surrounded by your retinues,
On this place of practice, shower down your blessings!
Make this maṇḍala shine and glow in splendour!
Grant us yogins and yoginīs the four empowerments!
Dispel all negative and obstructing forces that lead astray!
Show us the signs and marks of the siddhis!
Grant us the attainments, ordinary, and supreme!