The Melodious Song of Vajra Harmony
In Praise of Red Sarasvatī
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Oṃ sarasvati hrīṃ 
Manifestation of all the conquerors’s speech,
The thought of whom grants longevity, wisdom,
Merit and the most supreme intelligence—
Red Sarasvatī, to you I offer homage and praise. 
Red as a ruby,
With a face of beauty and captivating form,
The mere glimpse of which is never enough—
Mother of the victorious ones, to you I offer praise. 
With the powerful king of jewels,
You bring down rains of all that is desirable,
And in the clear surface of the mirror you hold
Existence and quiescence are reflected—to you I offer praise. 
Nurturer of naturally present wisdom,
The immaculate source
Of qualities seen and unseen—
Scarlet songstress, to you I offer praise. 
You utterly eradicate the dark
Which lingers in the heart
After scant visualization of your form
And recitation of your mantra—to you I offer praise. 
Grant me, I pray, the confidence and intellect
To master the meaning of the oceanic teachings
And the outer and inner sciences, including
Grammar, logic, poetry, composition, and astrology. 
Make me unhindered in exposition, debate and composition,
Unblock the eight channels to wisdom,
Such as the swift, powerful insight into the profound and vast,
And release the eight treasures of courageous eloquence.[1] 
From now until I attain awakening,
May I always meet a genuine teacher,
Expand the wisdom light of twofold knowledge,
And have the capacity to serve the teachings. 
Through the blessings of Mañjuśrī,
May brilliant orange light shine out
To banish the darkness that besets teachings and beings,
And bring about the youthful wonder of virtue and excellence. 
By the light of the moon and a precious electric lamp during the first session of the night on the third 'excellence' of the waxing phase of the month of victory,[2] while travelling by boat along the Ganges, Tsuklak Lungrik Nyima Mawé Sengé wrote down and prayed whatever came to mind. Vījayantu. Maṅgalam.
| Translated by by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2021.

Bibliography
Tibetan Edition
’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "Dbyangs can dmar mo la bstod pa rdo rje sgra ma’i dbyangs snyan/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986. Vol. 2: 417–418

Version: 1.1-20210806




The eight treasures of courageous eloquence are: 1) treasure of recollection; 2) treasure of intelligence; 3) treasure of realization; 4) treasure of retention (dhāraṇī); 5) treasure of courageous eloquence; 6) treasure of Dharma; 7) treasure of bodhicitta; 8) treasure of accomplishment.  ↩


i.e., the twelfth month  ↩