The Sweet Melody of Devotion A Prayer to the Great Omniscient Lord Tsongkhapa
Namo guru bhaṭṭarākāya! 1
Single embodiment of the knowledge, love and power
Of all the oceanic Victorious Ones and their heirs,
Venerable guru Lobzang Drakpa, while recalling
The liberational qualities of your secret body, speech and mind, I pray to you.
Heroic Mañjuśrī assuming a human guise,
Appearing to ordinary perception as a spiritual guide,
Adorned with the saffron robes of a disciplined monk,
Lobzang, Second Conqueror, to you I pray.
Your body is pure, unstained by any trace of fault,
With a wondrous fragrance to delight the victors,
Arising from your perfection of ethical discipline—
Great arhat, foe-destroyer, at your feet I pray.
Inspired by love borne throughout beginningless time,
Your heart possesses only the wish to benefit others,
Adorned with stainless moon-like kindness and compassion—
Master of intelligent benevolence, to you I pray.
You eradicated thoughts of anger and their habitual traces,
And now you guide beings as numerous as space is vast
Towards the excellent and sublime palace of awakening—
To you whose great courage is unfaltering, I pray.
You mastered the bodhicitta of cherishing others above yourself
And bore all the maleficence of beings in this degenerate age,
By donning the robust armour of the six pāramitās—
Great bodhisattva, heir to the victorious, to you I pray.
You understood the essence of the scriptures, both sūtra and mantra,
Were impeccable and unimpeded in exposition, debate and composition,
And your noble activity extended throughout existence and quiescence—
Incomparable holder of the teachings in the Land of Snows, to you I pray.
Outwardly, your mindstream is restrained by the pratimokṣa,
Inwardly, you preside over the treasury of the awakening mind,
Secretly, you are the foremost master of the wisdom of union—
Vajra holder of the three sets of vows, to you I pray.
You insightfully began a tradition of the Middle Way beyond extremes,
Received the nectar of profoundest meaning from Mañjughoṣa,
And took confidence from the play of Sarasvatī in your throat—
To the one who appeared as a second Nāgārjuna, I pray.
You mastered Vajradhara’s secret treasury in particular
And became a powerful holder of secrets,
A custodian of glorious Guhyasamāja, magical Cakrasaṃvara,
Kālacakra and other tantras of the Mantra vehicle—to you I pray.
Through perfectly pursuing the unerring, noble way
Of the chariot that travels the road of the two stages,
You attained the level of the four kāyas without difficulty—
Sovereign Vajradhara, to you I pray.
In short, through understanding how all the teachings
Of the Sage are personal advice beyond contradiction,
You surpassed every rival as a master of the teachings—
All-knowing noble lord, to you I pray.
Since there is no one but you whom we might call
The vital axis of the teachings of the Lion of the Śakyas,
You are supreme among rarities of the three worlds—
Second Lord of Sages, to you I pray.
All beings including the devas could spend every day
Reciting even a fraction of your deeds of liberational,
For you are the foremost of all those worthy of praise—
Venerable guru, at your feet I pray.
Now before the great regent, the magnificent Maitreya,
You are graced with the flower-like name Mañjugarbha
And constantly savour the Dharma of the Great Vehicle—
Venerable guru, at your feet I pray.
From this moment on, throughout all my lives to come,
May I bow in reverence at the Mañjughoṣa Guru’s lotus feet,
Free my mind through his well-spoken nectar-like instructions,
And always adhere to the pure livelihood of the Kadampas.
May the venerable guru’s magnanimous resolve, aspirations,
Enlightened activity, knowledge, love and spiritual power
Become fully present in the minds of all without exception,
And, with such power, may we serve the teachings and beings!