The Self-Radiance of Indestructible Awareness and Emptiness An Aspiration towards the Meaning of the Indivisible Ground, Path and Fruition of the Great Perfection Mañjuśrī
You embody the wisdom of all the bliss-gone buddhas and their heirs
Throughout the ten directions and four times, and keep to the way of non-duality –
Ever-youthful Mañjuśrī, ‘Gentle Splendour,’ the state of perfect equality:
May we spontaneously perfect the real meaning of non-action!
With the devotion of viewing the primordial protector and glorious guru
As the enlightened body of truth, the dharmakāya of perfect equality,
May the inspiration of the ultimate lineage be transferred into our hearts,
And may we gain the great empowerment of the expression of awareness!
Primordially present and thus not forged through exertion,
It does not depend on capacity or constitution;
As it is so simple, we doubt this mystery of the mind:
Let the guru’s instructions give us the strength to see!
Elaboration and analysis are superfluities of thought,
While seeking and cultivating serve only to exhaust.
Focusing and meditating are traps that merely bind –
Let such painful complexity cease within the mind!
Beyond thought and expression, there’s nothing that is seen.
Nor is there more to it, something additional, unseen.
This is the profound point for the mind to ascertain.
May we realize this nature, so hard to point to and make plain!
Always pure, without complexity, it avoids the eternalist extreme.
Rigpa’s radiance is spontaneously present, not a nihilistic void.
Although spoken of as two, that’s for ease of comprehension:
May we see the meaning of equality, beyond division and description!
Like a finger pointing to the moon,
Reasoning and words show the way at first.
But the natural state is no object of thought,
So let us turn within and thereby truly see!
In this, you won't find anything to be removed,
Nor conceive of what could be added or produced.
Dharmatā is unstained by efforts to block or cultivate:
May we arrive at the state that's spontaneously present!
Although we might label a ground to be known ,
Path to be followed , or fruition to be attained ,
In the natural state, these are like levels of space:
Effortlessly, then, may we keep to true non-action!
Impure saṃsāric phenomena, conceived in delusion,
And their opposites too, labelled ‘pure appearance’,
Are dependent designations, elaborate projections:
May we see their absence in the unelaborate condition!
The actual nature as it is, beyond the ordinary mind,
Is obscured by tainted notions of view and meditation.
In true ordinariness there is neither theory nor practice:
May we naturally remain in the genuine condition!
To focus on anything only poisons the view,
Deliberate fixation is but a meditative flaw,
Adopting and avoiding are perilous to action:
May we see the nature beyond such affliction!
Directly seeing what transcends the ordinary mind:
Rigpa’s radiance that’s not conceptually confined,
Without binding the sky in the rope of conjecture,
Let us master the genuine state of natural rest!
The Gentle Voiced — Mañjughoṣa — of natural luminosity
Is the cognizance of self-awareness, the youthful vase body:
May the brilliant lamp of naturally arisen insight
Banish the dense darkness of mind’s obscurations!
In the nature, which is uncompounded and uncontrived,
Nothing can be generated anew through fabricated paths,
Which is why the ultimate fruit does not arise from a cause.
May we come to see what is, and always has been, within!
Husk-like words of speculative ideas lead only to delusion:
However they’re expressed, they entangle us in thought.
Let us practise instead the heart’s profound instructions,
Which arise not from scripture, but are intuitively known!
The mind of perceiver and perceived is essentially deluded.
No matter what its focus, it never accords with how things are.
May we attain the buddhahood of definitive reality –
The natural wisdom-kāya that does not derive from mind!
Within the all-pervading space of rigpa, empty and aware,
All things are equal, and, in this single, perfect sphere,
There are no longings or fears for saṃsāra or nirvāṇa:
May we capture this stronghold of unlocated dharmakāya!
Whatever we perceive, as the body or as objects of the senses,
Is like defective vision, apparent through the force of thought alone —
By means of the natural radiance of great, non-conceptual wisdom,
May all be purified into the original space of phenomenal exhaustion!
At that time, may we gain the ultimate, unobstructed fruition,
And, with a wisdom buddha-form as vast and limitless as the sky,
Become wish-granting jewels, providing benefit and happiness
To beings everywhere, throughout the whole infinity of space and time!
‘Merely hearing this is sure to bring liberation’ —
Thus, Vajradhara praised the supreme of paths.
What need is there to mention holding it in mind?
May the truth of dharmatā swiftly bring liberation!
‘When it’s difficult for students to follow effort-based vehicles,
The teachings of Samantabhadra’s wisdom-mind will arise’—
May these essential teachings, praised in such statements,
Pervade the whole universe, spreading everywhere, far and wide!