The Lotus Garland A Short Feast-Offering for the Female Practice of the Heart Essence of the Vast Expanse Refuge and Bodhicitta Giving the Command Protection Circle Blessing the Offering Substances Meditating on Clear Realization. 1 The Visualization for Recitation Feast Offering Blessing the Articles Enjoying the Accomplishment Substances Dedicating the Remainder Confession Completion Phase Dedication of Merit Aspiration
Namo! Mother of all the buddhas, Vajravārāhī,
In you, I take refuge, beyond union and separation.
I will lead all beings, impartially,
To the state of great bliss.
Hrīḥ. In the great, emanated maṇḍala
Even the names of obstacles cannot be found.
Yet adventitiously, dualistic thoughts and obstacles do arise—
Do not stay here, but be gone!
oṃ sumbha(ni) sumbhani hūṃ | gṛhṇa gṛhṇa hūṃ | gṛhṇāpaya gṛhṇapāya hūṃ | ānaya ho bhagavān vidyārāja hūṃ phaṭ
Hrīḥ. From the state of the completely perfect nature
Arises a great tent made of weapons, blazing with a mass of flames.
A fence of light pervades everywhere,
Which no impurities can penetrate.
vajra-rakṣa
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ. Unsurpassable outer, inner and secret offerings appear,
Like the infinite offering clouds of Samantabhadra.
Substantial in essence, yet transforming
Into enjoyments that please the wisdom deities.
oṃ vajra-arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda sarva-pañca rakta baliṅta mahā-pūjā āḥ hūṃ
Āḥ. All that appears is the expanse of the five mothers.
All that exists is the circle of the ḍākinīs.
The celestial palace is beyond cause and condition:
The single entrance symbolises the single sphere 2 of all-pervading space.
In the centre of the palace blazing with great bliss,
Upon the heart of a blossoming lotus
And a sun-disc seat, stands the foremost of the ḍākinīs:
In the expanse of dharmakāya she is Samantabhadrī,
In the sambhogakāya realm she is Vajravārāhī,
And in nirmāṇakāya form she is Yeshe Tsogyal.
She has one face and two hands; her body is red in colour.
She is naked, standing in the posture of equanimity, yet ready to act.
Passionate and smiling,
In her right hand she holds a small skull-drum 3
That is raised and played close to her ear.
In her left hand she holds a hooked knife, the handle
Resting on her hip; her bearing is imposing and graceful.
Her bhaga is expanded and her breasts swell.
She is adorned with jewels and youth-ornaments;
And wears a garland of white lotus flowers. 4
The six bone ornaments adorn her body, 5
Her black, glistening hair is plaited,
And her jewelled diadem shines majestically.
Her central eye gazes into all-encompassing space.
Her sambhogakāya eye tames beings.
Her nirmāṇakāya eye summons the three realms.
In her body the maṇḍalas of all the classes of tantra are perfectly complete.
She is surrounded by a vast assembly of hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs.
The lord of the families is Mighty Lotus with Skull-Garland. 6
The youthful ācārya has a light complexion and is smiling.
He appears in the form of a heruka and plays a small skull-drum and bell.
The samaya and wisdom deities are indivisible.
Merely by meditating on them I gain accomplishment.
I am the ḍākinī. In my heart
Is Vārāhī, dark blue in colour and holding a hooked knife and skull-cup.
In her heart is a coil of joy, in the centre of which is the syllable vaṃ,
Encircled by the mantra garland. It revolves, emitting light rays that
Illuminate and enhance the appearance of the deities
It invokes the wisdom mind of the guru, the lord of the families,
Who sends out light rays that accomplish the two benefits.
From the guru’s body, a stream of ambrosia,
Undefiled great bliss, flows down.
Through the power of the four blisses
The primordial wisdom of the four empowerments is experienced.
oṃ padmo-yoginī-jñāna-vārāhī hūṃ
oṃ guhya-jñāna bodhicitta-mahāsukha rulu rulu hūṃ bhyo hūṃ
Hoḥ. In the wondrous vessel vessel of great bliss
Are arranged the delights of the feast-offering,
The samaya substances that are free from accepting and rejecting.
With oṃ āḥ hūṃ they are transformed into ambrosia.
Hūṃ. The Unsurpassed 9 and the other celestial realms,
The sacred places where the heroic ones 10 and ḍākinīs gather,
The twenty-four emanated places,
Are inwardly the cities of our vajra body.
The crown of the head is Jālandhara and so on—
Dwelling in the maṇḍala of the three seats of completeness, 11
Heroic ones and yoginīs,
Ḍākas and ḍākinīs—
Come and enjoy this feast-offering!
Your top-knots swaying,
Your long tresses swinging to and fro,
Your earrings, anklets and armlets jingling,
Your bone ornaments rattling, your tiny bells ringing,
With small skull-drums and bells resounding,
Take pleasure in our vajra songs and dances!
We offer you the enjoyment of these sensory delights as the feast!
We confess our impairments of samaya!
Liberate outer and inner obstacles into all-encompassing space!
Grant us the supreme and common accomplishments!
Hūṃ. From the purity of appearance and existence
Delightful fulfilment substances, fulfilling every wish, arise naturally.
Outer, inner and secret offerings in abundance, nothing missing,
Like Samantabhadra’s offering clouds of great bliss.
May this fulfil the wishes of the hosts of wisdom ḍākinīs,
And may the wishes of the retinue and other manifestations be fulfilled.
Having fulfilled their wishes, we confess impairments, breakages, transgressions and confusions.
Grant us the supreme and common accomplishments!
My body has the nature of the three vajras.
Deities of the maṇḍalas within it, ocean of victorious ones,
Through the wheel of the feast’s ambrosia of great bliss,
May you be pleased and enjoy this as supreme bliss and equality!
mahā-sukha a la la hoḥ
oṃ ākāro mukhaṃ sarvadharmānām ādyanutpannatvāt oṃ āḥ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
Peṃ. All you attendants who share in the remainder and carry out the commands:
The thirty-two ḍākinīs,
The great kiṃkara with consorts and laṅkā spirits in your hundreds of thousands,
The three hundred sixty classes of messengers,
The Four Swift Ones and Eight Blazing Ones,
Seven Mātṛkās and Four Sisters,
The forceful, roaming and therianthropic spirits— 12
You who crave leftovers and roam the assembly halls,
Please accept this excellent remainder!
Dispel all unfavourable, negative circumstances and obstacles!
Accomplish the activities entrusted to you, this is our request!
Hūṃ. In the maṇḍala of the wisdom ḍākinī,
If our offerings were not complete, or our practice was inattentive,
Our meditation drowsy, dull and lifeless,
Forgive all such confusion and mistakes, I pray!
oṃ vajrasatvasamayam anupālaya vajrasatva tvenopatiṣṭha ḍṛḍho me bhava sutoṣyo me bhava supoṣyo me bhava anurakto me bhava sarvasiddhiṃ me prayaccha sarvakarmasu ca me cittaṃ śreyaḥ kuru hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ bhagavan sarvatathāgatavajra mā me muñca vajrī bhava mahāsamayasattva āḥ
Hoḥ. Like bubbles appearing on water,
The deities of the maṇḍala, created by myself,
Dissolve into the all-pervading space of primordial wisdom— vajra muḥ !
In the post-meditation, everything arises as the illusory body of the deity.
Hoḥ. In the maṇḍala of the wisdom ḍākinī,
By practising the generation and completion phases and recitations,
Whatever sources of merit I have
I dedicate to the enlightenment of all beings!
Hoḥ. All that appears and exists is the celestial realm and
Vajrayoginī, unchanging great bliss.
Vajravārāhī, truly blessed with the most sublime of qualities,
May we see your true face and attain enlightenment!
Hoḥ. Through the blessing of the lineage of the vidyādharas,
And through the truth of the Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha,
And through the auspicious interdependence of the profound Secret Mantrayāna:
May all be auspicious to pacify the eight fears!
May all be auspicious for developing life and merit!
May all be auspicious to bring perception under our control!
May all be auspicious to annihilate negative, misleading forces!
With all attachment to perception transformed and perfected as the form of the deity,
All sound purified into the great bliss of mantra,
All thoughts matured into the luminosity of dharmakāya—
May all be auspicious, so that we attain the translucent rainbow body!