The Accomplishment of Supreme Enlightened Activity A Recitation Manual for The Vajrakīla Root Tantra Fragment I. Preliminaries II. Main Part
In the guru, the glorious heruka, embodiment of all peaceful and wrathful deities,
And the assembly of ḍākinīs, I take refuge.
In order to swiftly reach awakening for others sake,
I will recite the king of tantras.
Āḥ. From within the indestructible basic space of emptiness,
Naturally arises illusory compassion.
My own awareness appears as the great weapon, a blue syllable hūṃ .
[In an instant] it is transformed, and, standing upon lotus, sun-disc and mahādevas, is
Vajrakumāra, the colour of the sky,
With three faces—blue, white and red—
And six hands—the two on the right holding nine- and five- pronged vajras,
The two on the left wielding a blazing fireball and khaṭvāṅga,
And the last two rolling a kīla-dagger the size of Mount Meru.
He is adorned with the heruka and charnel-ground ornaments,
And in union with his consort Dīptacakrā,
Who holds an utpala flower and a skull-cup filled with blood,
As he presides amidst the blazing brilliance of wisdom fire.
In his heart, in the centre of a dome of light,
Presides Vajrasattva, the size of a thumb.
Within his heart, upon a sun- and moon-disc,
Rests an ever-shining blue hūṃ .
Samayasattva and jñānasattva are indivisible.
The empowerment, naturally bestowed, is ever-perfect.
From the syllable hūṃ the sound of the tantra reverberates.
As the sound permeates the all-encompassing space of phenomena,
It makes offerings to the infinite victors of the three roots,
And purifies the latent tendencies of the animate and inanimate world of the six classes of beings.
All appearances are the pristine form of the yidam deity.
All sounds are the sounds of the vajra-tantra,
All is perfected within unborn natural awareness –
I will recite the tantra while resting in the natural state of infinite purity.
oṃ vajra-jihā
Through the reverberation of the vajra-tantra
May all beings of the three realms
Conquer the four māras of delusory thoughts and
Actualize the unborn dharmakāya.
The appearances of the deities dissolve into the expanse of empty awareness.
The union of space and awareness arises as the deity’s form.
vajra-kāya-vāk-citta rakṣa hūṃ
Oṃ. Essence of space, dharmakāya Vajrasattva,
Natural display of awareness, Vajrakumāra,
Union of space and awareness, root and lineage masters
Grant your blessings so that all may be auspicious for accomplishing the excellent common and supreme siddhis!