The Excellent Path to Perfect Liberation A Guidance Practice (Nedren) for the Dukngal Rangdrol (Natural Liberation of Suffering) Practice of the Great Compassionate One, from the Longchen Nyingtik Guidance Practice of the Six Realms 1. Purifying the Hells 2. Purifying the Preta Realm 3. Purifying the Animal Realm 4. Purifying the Asura Realm 5. Purifying the Deva Realm 6. Purifying the Human Realm 1. The Vase Empowerment 2. The Mantra Empowerment of Enlightened Speech 3. The Vajra Empowerment of Enlightened Mind The Transference
Hrīḥ. I appear clearly in the form of the Great Compassionate One.
In my heart is the syllable hrīḥ , from which there emanate rays of light,
Summoning the consciousness of the deceased, from the seven realms
Or wherever it may reside, so that it dissolves into this form.
Namo! Deity of compassion, embodiment of the Three Jewels and Three Roots,
Lord Avalokiteśvara, Natural Liberation of Suffering,
Through the power of your truth, may the consciousness of the deceased
Be brought swiftly into this tsenjang 2 !
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ
The deceased: aṅkuśāya jaḥ jaḥ
Hrīḥ. You who have died and passed beyond, now listen well!
Wherever you are reborn among the six classes, it will only be a place of suffering.
To escape, remain securely in this material support for the three doors—
A form and name to which you are attached.
ṇrīḥ jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ tiṣṭhantu
Hrīḥ. All you who are brought into being through karmic debt and enmity in saṃsāra,
All you demons and executioners,
All you murderous spirits who prey on vital breath and steal the life force,
Take this ransom offering and go elsewhere! Phaṭ!
oṃ sumbha(ni) sumbhani hūṃ | gṛhṇa gṛhṇa hūṃ | gṛhṇāpaya gṛhṇapāya hūṃ | ānaya ho bhagavān vidyārāja hūṃ phaṭ
oṃ gha gha ghātaya ghātaya sarva duṣṭān hūṃ phaṭ | kīlaya kīlaya sarvapāpān phaṭ | hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ vajra kīlaya vajradharodājñāpayati sarva vīghnan kāya vāk cittaṃ vajra kīlaya hūṃ phaṭ
All you demons and executioners — uccāṭaya māraya phaṭ !
Ho. Embodiment of all sources of refuge, Guru Avalokiteśvara,
Through your compassion, protect those like me, who lack protection!
Free us from the ocean of suffering in saṃsāra’s six realms!
And lead us safely to the dry shores of liberation!
Hūṃ! Listen, son or daughter of noble family, you who have departed this life,
Although you gained a human body so difficult to find,
Through the unrelenting force of impermanence and death,
Your consciousness now wanders in another place.
And your composite physical form has been left behind.
Buffeted by the winds of negative karma and habitual patterns,
You are propelled by the ripening of pure and impure deeds,
Led helplessly by the messengers of Yama, Lord of Death
To the unwelcome destination of the three lower realms,
Where suffering is so terribly hard to bear!
These are the results of what you have done yourself.
But know that in reality what appears to deluded perception
Is like a heap of stones in the distance seen as a person or a coloured rope perceived as a snake,
And recognize it as it appears.
From your own natural awareness, beyond distraction,
Pray to the deity and the lama!
Hūṃ. Through the flowing water of the nirmāṇakāya’s manifest display,
The expression of loving kindness and affection,
May all the impurity and obscurations of your
Aggregates, elements and sense-sources be cleansed and purified!
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ
Let all the harmful actions and obscurations accumulated with the body throughout all the deceased’s countless lifetimes in the past, present and future throughout beginningless saṃsāra, all be purified! Sarva śuddhe śuddhe svāhā !
Hūṃ. Through the flowing water of the unceasing saṃbhogakāya,
The expression of the spontaneously perfect, all-pervading space,
May all the impurity and obscurations of your
Eight consciousnesses be cleansed and purified!
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ
oṃ hūṃ trāṃ hrīḥ āḥ
Let all the harmful actions and obscurations accumulated with the speech throughout all the deceased’s countless lifetimes in the past, present and future throughout beginningless saṃsāra, all be purified! Sarva śuddhe śuddhe svāhā !
Hūṃ. Through the flowing water of the youthful vase body,
The radiance of primordial purity beyond conceptual elaboration,
May all impurities and obscurations,
Both innate and acquired, be cleansed and purified!
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ | buddha jñāna dharmadhātu āḥ
Let all the harmful actions and obscurations accumulated with the mind throughout all the deceased’s countless lifetimes in the past, present and future throughout beginningless saṃsāra, all be purified! Sarva śuddhe śuddhe svāhā !
Hūṃ. The five-coloured light that is the expression of ignorance,
By solidifying that which is clung to as mine,
The outer and inner five elements
Are like the mother and father who create
The objects which give rise to the five poisons.
May this poison be expelled through the powerful play of deity, mantra and samādhi,
And all the obscurations of the five poisons
Be purified in the space of each respective element,
So that any clinging to the poisons is eliminated and left like empty space!
Let all the harmful actions and obscurations accumulated by means of the five poisons throughout all the deceased’s countless lifetimes in the past, present and future throughout beginningless saṃsāra, all be purified! Sarva śuddhe śuddhe svāhā !
Hūṃ. This torma, complete with all the qualities that delight the senses,
A perfect treasure of all that is desirable,
I dedicate in order to purify all the karmic debts and enmity
The deceased has accumulated and provoked through anger.
namaḥ sarva-tathāgatāvalokite oṃ sambhara sambhara hūṃ
Hūṃ. Nirmāṇakāya tamer of beings, anger’s utter purity,
Sage of the hells, holding fire and water as your emblems—
By granting empowerment to the deceased, this child of noble family,
May he/she gain the power of the secret body, speech and mind of Vajra Akṣobhya!
oṃ mune ye svāhā | oṃ daha daha sarva-naraka gate hetuṃ hūṃ phaṭ
Hūṃ. Listen, deceased one, you who have left the body, child of noble family,
Through the fault of clinging to a self in the selfless nature of the mind,
And an ‘other’ in appearances which are devoid of any other,
Arises the terrifying inner and outer world—the environment and beings—of the hot and cold hells.
In reality, as this is but the delusion of your very own mind,
Know it to be deluded experience,
And, like waking from a dream, abandon these infernal realms!
Hūṃ. This torma, complete with all the qualities that delight the senses,
A perfect treasure of all that is desirable,
I dedicate in order to purify all the karmic debts and enmity
The deceased has accumulated and provoked through greed.
namaḥ sarva-tathāgatāvalokite oṃ sambhara sambhara hūṃ
Hūṃ. Nirmāṇakāya tamer of beings, the utter purity of greed,
Sage of the pretas, holding a casket as your emblem—
By granting empowerment to the deceased, this child of noble family,
May he/she gain the power of the secret body, speech and mind of Amitābha!
oṃ mune kśeṃ svāhā | oṃ paca paca sarva-pretaka gate hetun hūṃ phaṭ
Hūṃ. Listen, deceased one, you who have left the body, child of noble family,
Through the delusion of not recognizing the two forms of selflessness,
You accumulate deeds out of greed and are reborn in the preta realm,
Afflicted by the unbearable sufferings of hunger and thirst,
Know this to be just like a dream!
Abandon the land of the pretas and seek instead the path to liberation and pure realms!
Hūṃ. This torma, complete with all the qualities that delight the senses,
A perfect treasure of all that is desirable,
I dedicate in order to purify all the karmic debts and enmity
The deceased has accumulated and provoked through stupidity.
namaḥ sarvatathāgata avalokite oṃ sambhara sambhara hūṃ
Hūṃ. Nirmāṇakāya tamer of beings, stupidity’s utter purity,
Sage of the animals, holding a volume of  the scriptures—
By granting empowerment to the deceased, this child of noble family,
May he/she gain the power of the secret body, speech and mind of Vairocana!
oṃ mune breṃ svāhā | oṃ matha matha sarva-tiryak gate hūṃ phaṭ
Hūṃ. Listen, deceased one, you who have left the body, child of noble family,
Through the karma of ignorance, not recognizing your own nature,
You will be born among the animals and experience dullness of mind,
And the unbearable sufferings of servitude and exploitation.
Now, as if turning away from the perception of a coloured rope as a snake,
Abandon the animal realm and take up the genuine path!
Hūṃ. This torma, complete with all the qualities that delight the senses,
A perfect treasure of all that is desirable,
I dedicate in order to purify
All the karmic debts and enmity the deceased has accumulated and provoked through rivalry.
namaḥ sarva-tathāgatāvalokite oṃ sambhara sambhara hūṃ
Hūṃ. Nirmāṇakāya tamer of beings, jealousy’s utter purity,
Sage of the asuras, bearing sword and armour—
By granting empowerment to the deceased, this child of noble family,
May he/she gain the power of the secret body, speech and mind of Amoghasiddhi!
oṃ mune sruṃ svāhā | oṃ vidankhatakha 4 chinda chinda hūṃ phaṭ
Hūṃ. Listen, deceased one, you who have left the body, child of noble family,
Based on the fully developed forms of ignorance, both innate and acquired,
Acting out of jealousy and rivalry creates karma that impels beings,
So that they take birth in the asura realm, where conflict is unbearable.
Now, as if clearing away the mistaken perception of a heap of stones as a man,
Abandon the asura realm, and seek instead the heavenly realms of total purity!
Hūṃ. This torma, complete with all the qualities that delight the senses,
A perfect treasure of all that is desirable,
I dedicate in order to purify all the karmic debts and enmity
The deceased has accumulated and provoked through pride.
namaḥ sarva-tathāgatāvalokite oṃ sambhara sambhara hūṃ
Hūṃ. Nirmāṇakāya tamer of beings, the utter purity of pride,
Sage of the devas, holding a vīṇā as your emblem—
By granting empowerment to the deceased, this child of noble family,
May he/she gain the power of the secret body, speech and mind of Ratnasambhava!
oṃ mune kreṃ svāhā | oṃ sarva-sukha sarva-karma chinda chinda hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
Hūṃ. Listen, deceased one, you who have left the body, child of noble family,
Through the power of being influenced by the all-ground consciousness,
And carrying out actions based on pride and arrogance,
You will be born in the deva realm and suffer the unbearable torment
Of death and transmigration and the like,
So, as if dispelling an illusion, abandon the deva realm!
And take up the genuine path leading to omniscience!
Hūṃ. This torma, complete with all the qualities that delight the senses,
A perfect treasure of all that is desirable,
I dedicate in order to purify all the karmic debts and enmity
The deceased has accumulated and provoked through the five poisons in general,
And especially through desire.
namaḥ sarva-tathāgatāvalokite oṃ sambhara sambhara hūṃ
Hūṃ. Nirmāṇakāya tamer of beings, the utter purity of desire,
Sage of the human beings, holding the mendicant’s staff and alms bowl—
By granting empowerment to the deceased, this child of noble family,
May he/she gain the power of the secret body, speech and mind of the Great Compassionate One!
oṃ mune suṃ svāhā | oṃ ṇri viśvamukha chinda chinda hūṃ phaṭ
Hūṃ. Listen, deceased one, you who have left the body, child of noble family,
As a result of the five sensory consciousnesses pursuing objects of the senses,
And generating attachment and aversion for the six sense objects,
You will be born in the human realm and constantly undergo the eleven types of suffering, so difficult to bear.
Instead, by realizing that this is like seeing your own shadow
And taking it for an enemy,
Abandon clinging to self,
And arrive at the level of Padmapāṇi!
Namo. Actual embodiments of the Three Jewels and Three Roots,
Deities of the Natural Liberation of Suffering,
To you I prostrate! In you I take refuge! To you I confess all faults!
I make offerings and implore you to turn the Dharma Wheel,
I rejoice in all sources of virtue and beseech you to remain.
And I dedicate all merit for the benefit of beings.
oṃ cakṣu bhandha vāra maṇāya svāhā
Om. In the Akaniṣṭha pure land that is the inherent purity of my own perception,
Within the palace of the Natural Liberation of Suffering
As I request the ripening of empowerment,
May the Great Compassionate One be my refuge!
Hūṃ. Guardians of the doors to the ultimate Akaniṣṭha,
Four deities who possess the four boundless qualities,
So that you may work for beings’ welfare,
Let the doors to great wisdom be opened!
Embodiment of all the buddhas of the ten directions and their heirs,
Sublime and noble Avalokiteśvara, treasury of compassion,
Natural Liberation of Suffering—in the deities of this maṇḍala,
With devotion I take refuge.
All the vows and commitments of the lay practitioner, monk or nun,
And of the bodhisattva and the mantra practitioner—
All of them, without exception, I shall uphold.
In a single instant the deceased appears clearly
In the form of the noble Avalokiteśvara,
With three syllables at the three centres,
From which light radiates out,
Invoking the hosts of wisdom deities, who dissolve into the deceased in deity form,
And become inseparable, of a single taste.
ārya-lokeśvara jñāna-vajrāveśāya a a
For the descent of the wisdom deities and ensuring their stable presence, recite Tiṣṭha-vajra etc.
Hūṃ. This flower of auspicious substance
Is offered to the deities of the maṇḍala.
May it fall on the special deities with whom
There is a karmic connection from the past!
puṣpe pratīccha hoḥ
Hūṃ. The blindfold represents the cataracts of ignorance.
Through the golden utensil of great compassion,
Let the eyes of wisdom be opened,
So that the face of the naturally arising deity is encountered!
jñāna-cakṣu praveśaya phaṭ
Hūṃ. Listen! Fortunate child of noble family,
Look! Look at the maṇḍala before you!
This maṇḍala of material substance
Is the nirmāṇakāya pure land of Akaniṣṭha,
The maṇḍala of the Great Compassionate One.
In reality, it is the essence, nature and compassionate energy
Of your own undeluded mind,
Spontaneously present as the Great Compassionate Avalokiteśvara.
Know that there is no other yidam deity
Aside from this realization.
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ hrīḥ | a a aḥ
Oṃ. Outwardly the vase and its contents,
Inwardly the flowing nectar of the compassion
Of Padmapāṇi, the Holder of the Lotus—
By bestowing this empowerment on the body of the deceased,
May it ripen as the nirmāṇakāya!
...kayābhiṣiñca oṃ
Āḥ. Outwardly the sound of earth, water, fire and wind,
Inwardly the languages of the six classes of beings,
Secretly the secret speech of all the buddhas,
The empowerment that is contained within the seven syllables—
By bestowing this empowerment on the speech of the deceased,
May it ripen as the saṃbhogakāya!
...vākābhiṣiñca āḥ
Hūṃ. This material substance of the vajra
Symbolizes the enlightened mind of all the buddhas—
By bestowing this empowerment on the mind of the deceased,
May it ripen as the dharmakāya!
...cittābhiṣiñca hūṃ
Before you, in a precious vessel
Vast and expansive, are all manner of foodstuffs
Numerous enough to be eaten
By gods, human beings and the rest,
As well as tea, alcohol, milk, curd and other forms of drink—
An inexhaustible treasury fulfilling each and every wish.
Hūṃ. Supremely delicious food with a hundred flavours,
The very best of food and drink,
The finest clothes to wear and material things,
Are all blessed as an inexhaustible treasure
And dedicated to you, the deceased.
Through this, may you gain a perfect treasure of delight,
Perfectly suited to every sensory desire,
Just as I have dedicated.
May you be satisfied by the experience of happiness and bliss,
And ultimately arrive at the state of total purity!
Hūṃ. To the deities of the maṇḍala of the three seats,
Together with the objects, aggregates, elements and sense-sources,
We offer these gifts—accept them all!
May the accumulations be perfected and the obscurations purified!
And may you gain the power to enjoy the splendour of the five kāyas!
Hūṃ. May this lamp of the five wisdoms—
Empty in essence, yet by nature clear,
And the expressive power of its compassion unceasing—
Dispel the thick darkness of ignorance in the deceased,
So that he/she may see the realms of the three kāyas!
Hūṃ! Deceased one, son or daughter of noble family, listen well!
All the realms of saṃsāra, high or low,
Are like dungeons of the three sufferings,
In which all are imprisoned—this is certain.
So do not grasp! Do not be attached! But generate the supreme resolve.
To the west of here there lies
A place of perfect happiness and enjoyment,
Where even the name of suffering is unknown, a land of great bliss,
Wherein dwells the Lord of Boundless Life,
To his right is noble Avalokiteśvara,
And to his left, the mighty Vajrapāṇi,
All of them surrounded by countless buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Go there to that place!
Your mind itself is the syllable hrīḥ .
Swiftly now it moves, like a shooting star.
And in the expanse of Amitābha’s wisdom mind,
Merges indivisibly, of a single taste.
Recite “Hrīḥ” three times and then:
Phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ ( three times ]).
Hūṃ. In the fireplace of primordial purity beyond conceptual elaboration,
The fire of naturally arising wisdom is alight,
And the wood and kindling of conceptual thought
Are consumed without trace: jvala raṃ!
The destructive emotions are burned in the fire of wisdom,
The two forms of self are incinerated in the space of selflessness,
The ālaya and the two forms of ignorance
Are burnt away in the expanse of the youthful vase body,
And the seal of never falling back into saṃsāra is applied.
Having actualized the primordial ground of liberation,
May the welfare of limitless beings be accomplished!