Great Treasury of Blessings A Guru Yoga of Gatön Lekpa Rinpoche, Dharma Lord and Vajradhara Main Practice: Visualization Prayer
I and all other beings, from now until we reach awakening,
Take refuge in the supreme representative and embodiment of all buddha families.
In order to lead beings to unsurpassable awakening,
I shall put this profound guru yoga into practice.
My surroundings are the realm of Sukhāvatī,
Enchanting and inconceivable in its design.
The ground, which is of emerald and lapis lazuli,
Is marked with gold in a chequered pattern,
And upon it stands a blue palace of jewels and crystals,
Decorated with gold and multicoloured gemstones.
In its centre, upon a jewelled throne, lotus and white lunar seat,
Is the root guru, the Vajradhara and lord of Dharma
Ngawang Lekpa, in the form of the bodhisattva Padmarāja,
Bright red in colour, peaceful and smiling happily.
He wears saṃbhogakāya costume, adorned with silks and jewels,
And is elegantly attired in a lower garment of celestial blue silk.
His right hand covers his knee in the earth-touching gesture,
And his left is held at his heart in that of granting protection.
Between thumb and ring finger he clasps a long golden stalk,
Which reaches to the level of his ear and supports
An excellent vase containing the nectar of immortality.
He sits relaxedly with his two legs crossed,
The right leg touching the long stem of the lotus.
Like a rainbow appearing in a sky that is clear and bright,
He is vivid, captivating and resplendent with the signs and marks.
Within his form the great maṇḍalas of the three seats are complete.
His three centres are marked with the three syllables,
From which light radiates to invite all the sources of refuge,
Who dissolve into the root guru.
Sovereign of all buddha families, bodhisattva Padmarāja,
Inseparable from Amitābha, vajra of enlightened speech,
Great embodiment and representative of all sources of refuge,
To you I pray: guide me to the realm of Great Bliss.
Embodiment of all gurus, bodhisattva Padma, care for me.
Grant your blessings, that my mind may be matured and liberated.
Embodiment of all yidams, bodhisattva Padma, care for me.
Shower down a great rain of attainments, ordinary and supreme.
Embodiment of all ḍākinīs, bodhisattva Padma, care for me.
Dispel outer, inner and secret obstacles into space.
Embodiment of all dharma protectors, bodhisattva Padma, care for me.
Avert all adversity that hinders the practice of noble Dharma.
Embodiment of all wealth deities, bodhisattva Padma, care for me.
Amass clouds of favourable circumstances, prosperity and all that is desirable.
Embodiment of all source of refuge, bodhisattva Padma, care for me.
Guide me until enlightenment without every parting.
Holding the oceanic treasury of the profound and secret aural lineage
Of the lords of speech, Mañjughoṣas of the Sakya tradition,
You are without equal in creating a feast of excellent explanation,
Glorious guru, at your feet I pray!
oṃ āḥ vajra guru bodhisattva padmarāja sarva siddhi phala hūṃ svāhā
Finally the guru melts into light and dissolves into me.
Mind and wisdom merge as one, and in the union
Of emptiness and clarity of my own mind, the state of Mahāmudrā,
I preserve my own true face, unspoilt by thoughts of the three times.
May my constant devoted service at the feet of the guru 3
Cause delight, so that he may accept me with great compassion,
And I may savour the Vajrayāna and many other traditions
Always upholding the four types of oral transmission. 4
Through my hostility towards all the factors to be abandoned,
May I gain the supreme grounds, Perfect Joy and the rest,
Just as a white water lily blooms in the light of the moon,
And be accompanied by the victors’ heirs of the ten bhūmis. 5
May the glad tidings of how this yoga brings about
The attainment of victory spread in all directions,
Causing Māra’s hordes to feel despair and alarm,
And freedom’s victory banner swiftly to fly high.
May I always enjoy the company of victors’ heirs,
And attain the vajra body in all its splendour.
May I accompany the supremely wise and, as teachings resound, 6
Wield the vajra and bell with a majestic poise.
Having found such attainment for myself,
May I become the royal captain of a vast ship
In which to carry infinite sentient beings
Across the ocean of conditioned existence.
Through the force of the guru’s compassion,
Combined with all my own merits and strength,
May I and other beings perfectly accomplish
These aspirations just as I have set them out.