The Secret Practice of Dorjé Draktsal According to the Trio of the Guru’s Heart Practices from the Rituals of Profound Interdependence I. The Preliminary Stages II. The Stages of the Main Part III. The Concluding Stages
To the Guru-Heruka, I prostrate!
Hūṃ . In this innermost wrathful maṇḍala,
Only the empowered may remain.
Māras and false guides, all of you without exception,
Do not stay here, but disperse someplace else!
If you do not go, but dare to linger on,
Your brains will be blown into a hundred pieces!
Hūṃ . The phenomenal world is wisdom form, speech, and mind.
There is not even the name of impurity or false guides.
The surrounding edge of this mighty maṇḍala
Is a blazing mass of bejewelled vajra fire.
In non-dual basic space, there are no such things as obstructers.
Thus, the maṇḍala boundary is spontaneously present.
vajra rakṣa rakṣa bhrūṃ
raṃ yaṃ khaṃ
Hūṃ . The phenomenal world is the pure realm of the Charnel Display,
Where vast skull-cup vessels, spacious and ablaze,
Are filled with the five amṛtas and five meats. They melt into light
And are blessed by wisdom form, speech, and heart
To become billowing Ever-Excellent clouds of exaltation—
Outer, inner, and secret offerings, filling the infinite reaches of space.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ sarva pañca amṛta mahā rakta balingta sarva pūja hūṃ hrīḥ tha
Hūṃ . The intrinsic nature is utterly pure, just as it is.
The light of primordial wisdom pervades all.
Their unity, a dark blue syllable hūṃ , blazes forth,
Purifying the world and all beings into the space of the five Mothers,
From where the Charnel Display pure realm and celestial palace appear.
In the center of its outer and inner circles,
Upon a throne of lotus, sun, and rudra,
Stands Dorjé Drakpo Tsal, natural self-awareness.
Dark blue, I express the nine moods of dance,
While holding a nine-pronged vajra and bell,
And wearing a dark blue cape and charnel-ground attire.
Krodhiśvarī holds a curved knife and skullcup,
And we embrace in exaltation amid a mass of fire.
In the four directions are the Lords and Ladies of the four families,
Brown, yellow, red, and green, marked with their family insignia.
Above and below, in the cardinal and intermediate, are the ten Kings of Wrath,
Dark blue in colour, each holding a vajra and rolling a kīla,
With their consorts, offspring, and emanations surpassing measure.
At the outer gateways are the twenty princesses,
The twenty-eight iśvarī attendants,
And an ocean of the three roots, like billowing clouds.
They are spontaneously present as the vajra form, speech, and heart
Of the victorious ones and the five primordial wisdoms.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
oṃ hūṃ traṃ hrīḥ āḥ abhiṣiñca hūṃ
Hūṃ . From the island named Cāmara,
From the peak of the Glorious Copper-Colored Mountain,
From the Charnel Ground of Wrathful Display
In the north of the palace of Lotus Light,
Dorjé Drakpo, Vajra Wrath, come forth from basic space!
Lotus Heruka, come! Please come here!
Mighty vidyādharas, come! Please come here!
Wrathful lords and ladies, come! Please come here!
Vīras and ḍākinīs, come! Please come here!
Oath-bound Dharma guardians, come! Please come here!
Bestow resplendence upon this supreme place!
Grant us the four empowerments, supreme yogis that we are!
Remove all obstructers, false guides, and hindrances,
And bestow the supreme and common siddhis!
Guru-padma-heruka-saparivāra vajra-samajāḥ e ā ralli hrīṃ hrīṃ
jāḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ samaya-tiṣṭha lhan
atipūhoḥ pratīccha hoḥ
Hūṃ . The offerings of this supreme charnel ground defy all thought:
Amṛta of the eight root and thousand subsidiary ingredients,
The ‘great red’ of saṃsāra and afflictions liberated,
Torma of the five sense pleasures piled high as a mountain,
The primordial wisdom of wondrous union and liberation—
May this please you, maṇḍala of herukas!
oṃ mahā arghaṃ-pādyaṃ-puṣpe-dhūpe-āloke-gandhe-naividya-śabda pratīccha hoḥ sarva pañca amṛta kharaṃ khāhi mahā rakta khāhi mahā balingta khāhi tana gana pūja hoḥ jñāna dharmadhātu pūja hoḥ
Hūṃ . You have realized the ultimate lack of self, beyond extremes.
Full of love and compassion, you regard none as foe, yet still,
you never fail to act in order to influence evil beings.
Terrifying heruka, I offer you homage and praise!
Your supreme blazing body is a mountain of star sapphire,
Bright as a thousand suns, resplendent with majesty.
Your tongue flashes faster than lightning, your eyes are like sun and moon.
Monstrously charming hero, I offer you homage and praise!
With calls of ‘arali’, you make the three planes quake.
With bloody sounds of ‘hūṃ’ and ‘phaṭ’, you blast the māras’ hearts apart.
Your ferocious speech is deafening, like a hundred thousand claps of thunder.
A mere fraction of it accomplishes the great goal. To you, I offer homage and praise!
Through your intense compassion, with skilful means you tame beings.
Your wisdom heart is unwavering, ever even, in constant peace.
With your fierce courage, you subjugate one and all.
To you, defeater of the māra-hordes of wrong views, I offer homage and praise!
The buddha-family heirs and their retinues, those who hold the five wisdoms;
The surrounding wrathful ones, the ten virtues perfected;
The hosts of land and valley protectors, the gathering of sky-dancers—
To all the deities of the Heruka’s maṇḍala, I shower you with praise!
Hūṃ . Here in this maṇḍala of Wrathful Display,
I will accomplish the quintessential vidyādhara!
I will practice the approach and accomplishment
Of form, speech, mind, and wisdom, according to my sacred commitments.
I will never forsake them, even at the cost of my own life.
So, Vajra Wrath, grant me the accomplishments!
In the center of my chest, within a mass of light,
Is the wisdom being, Vajradhara,
And the samadhi being, a vajra in whose hub
There blazes hūṃ , the quintessential syllable,
Surrounded by the mantra garland.
Light streams forth and pleases the victorious sugatas,
Gathers back all the siddhis and dissolves them into me.
The peaceful and wrathful activities,
Free all beings into the unsurpassable state.
The environment is the pure realm of Wrathful Blaze;
All beings are the continuity of wisdom form, speech, and heart.
The wisdom maṇḍala is spontaneously present.
oṃ padma-śri-heruka-vajra-krodha hūṃ phaṭ
From form, speech, and heart, primordial wisdom blazes forth,
Incinerating dualistic fixation—that horde of foes and obstructers—
Bringing it to rest within the basic space of exaltation,
Primordial wisdom that is beyond duality.
hūṃ ha he phaṭ bhyo raṃ
Hūṃ . All manifestations, sprung from emptiness itself,
Are gathered back into the basic space of all,
And dissolved into the state of the Mighty Blaze,
The sky-like continuity, free from arising and ceasing.
Hūṃ . From birthless basic space manifests blazing wisdom-form,
The three planes of existence perfected as divine form.
This unchanging vajra nature
Is utterly indestructible.
vajra kā va ci rakṣa hūṃ
Hūṃ . With all appearances as divine form,
All sounds as mantra melody,
And luminous awareness as dharmakāya,
May I be the glory of all beings!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ