Jamyang Lodrö Gyatso’s Prayer of Unwavering Faith Upon Journeying to the Noble Land of India for a Second Time
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Oṃ svasti!
Even devas bowed respectfully at your lotus feet,
As they trembled and their diademed locks
Glistened with the light of a thousand jewels—
Lord of Sages, Kinsman of the Sun,[1] I bow my head before you. 
Long ago, countless ages in the past,
You pledged to bear beings’ burdens,
Particularly during this age of conflict
Neglected by other buddhas—to you I pay homage. 
Your twelve deeds, so great and so wondrous,
And incredible powers to tame in four ways[2]
Extend to infinite realms of the ten directions—
Lion of the Śākyas, at your feet I offer homage. 
Māras and those with the pride of false views,
Elephantine tīrthikas bloated with ignorance,
Were overpowered them with the weapon of your love—
God of gods, to you I offer homage. 
In the region of Sāheṭh[3] in particular,
When you displayed various miracles
To the six heretical teachers and their retinues
You were unrivalled throughout the three worlds—to you I offer homage. 
These miracles, exceedingly difficult to comprehend,
You displayed by the billion in the blink of an eye.
And your inconceivable three secrets, wisdom and blessings
Blazed like the fires at the end of an aeon—to you I offer homage. 
You turned the Wheel of Dharma, profound and vast,
Without any concept and attuned to disciples’ characters,
As if constantly sounding the drum of the devas.
Liberator of an ocean of disciples, to you I offer homage. 
Your turned aeons into instants, instants into aeons,
And within each of the subtlest, most minutes of particles
You displayed oceanic realms, teachers and voices
To bring beings to maturity—to you I offer homage. 
Supreme sage Siddhārtha, praised as a white lotus,
Born into the Śākya clan as the king of the Śākyas,
Great Muni, supreme among all the two-legged,
Recalling your liberation, I devotedly pay homage. 
From now on, throughout all my lives to come,
May I be cared for by the Kinsman of the Sun,
And may I and other beings swiftly accomplish
All your deeds, aspirations, and mind of awakening. 
Thus, Jamyang Lodrö Gyatso, who was born as a servant of the precious teachings of the Lord of Sages, offered and wrote this prayer with unwavering faith on the occasion of journeying to the noble land of India for a second time. Let there be virtue and auspiciousness!
| Translated by Adam Pearcey 2021, with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Terton Sogyal Trust.

Bibliography
Tibetan Edition
’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "'jam dbyangs blo gros rgya mtsho 'phags yul du thengs gnyis par bskyod skabs mi phyed dad pas gsol btab/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir, H.P.: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. (W1KG12986). Vol. 2: 329–330

Version: 1.1-20230307




nyi ma’i gnyen. A common epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni.  ↩


i.e., through the great merit of the buddha's body, directly through enlightened mind, through inconceivable miraculous abilities, and through knowledge conveyed in speech.  ↩


The modern-day Sāheṭh-Māheṭh is the site of the ancient Śrāvastī, the capital of Kośala and scene of the Buddha’s display of miracles.  ↩