Auspicious Dance of Longevity
A Song for Touring the Sacred Sites of Nepal
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Ahoye.
With auspicious appearances
And virtuous companions,
In the heart of Nepal
I, the yogi, have arrived.
This land of wonder,
In prospect sublime.
Blessed by the Buddha,
Its dharmakāya stūpas,
Three in number reside,
Bringing dazzling virtue,
Abundant prosperity,
And suffusive blessings,
All amassed like clouds,
And a rain of compassion
Cascading in showers.
Great gods of this world,
The keepers of wealth,
Grant fortune and plenty.
Men are all heroes,
With faces like conches
As ruddy as coral,
Noble and handsome.
Women are fair,
Like daughters of devas
Transported to earth. 
Ahoye.
Young children all gather,
Divine offspring at play.
Martial banners of heaven
Fly as if toward foes.
Terrain shaped by technology
Resounds with gentle music.
And blessed places of power
Fill the land all around.
Peaks like towering crystal,
Streams pure in eight ways,[1]
Bathing pools vast in number,
Sundry delicious food and drink,
Smooth fabrics that flutter and sway—
The sight of such a place as this
Truly brings joy to the mind. 
Ahoye.
May the virtue of this pilgrimage,
Which I now offer to the root guru,
Gladden his wise and noble heart,
And through its gift to former-mother beings,
May all set out upon freedom's finest path. 
Ahoye.
May performing this auspicious dance—once, twice, three times—bring joy and happiness in abundance. 
On the 5th day of the 12th month.[2]
| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2019.

Bibliography
Tibetan Edition
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "bal yul gnas bskor 'khor ba'i glu tshe ring zhabs bro/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 8: 451–452




i.e., the water has crystal clarity, coolness, sweetness, lightness, and softness; it is soothing to the stomach, free of impurities, and clears the throat.  ↩


Although not specified this was almost certainly the Fire Monkey year, meaning that the song was composed on 4 December 1956.  ↩