The Excellent Path to Enlightenment A Brief Practice of the Preliminaries The Four Thoughts Refuge and Bodhicitta Vajrasattva Maṇḍala Offering Guru Yoga
Guru, care for me!
Guru and Three Jewels—Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha—care for me, guide me, inspire me, make me one with you!
Now I have this unique opportunity, a free and well-favoured human form, so difficult to find.
But it will not last forever; death can come at any moment,
And wherever I am born in saṃsāra, it is a cause for suffering;
Whether my actions are virtuous or harmful, karma’s cause and effect cannot be escaped.
O guru, hold me with your compassion, so that I find the path to liberation!
Namo! Until we attain enlightenment, I and all beings
Take refuge in the three roots—guru, deva and ḍākinī.
So that I may attain buddhahood for the benefit of others,
I arouse bodhicitta, as aspiration, as action and in its absolute meaning.
Āḥ! On the crown of my head upon a lotus and moon disc,
Is the Guru Vajrasattva in union with his consort.
From the mantra in his heart flows a stream of nectar,
Which purifies all sickness, harmful influences, negative deeds and obscurations.
Vajrasattva melts into light and dissolves into me.
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ! All the pure realms of the three kāyas, all our possessions,
And clouds of offerings, outer, inner and secret,
I offer to the Three Jewels and the Three Roots,
Please accept them, and grant us supreme and ordinary siddhis!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ guru deva ḍākinī saparivāra ratna maṇḍala pūja megha āḥ hūṃ
In the sky before me, amidst an expanse of rainbow-coloured light,
Is my own root guru in the form of Padma Tötreng Tsal,
Surrounded by a vast gathering of vidyādharas of the three transmissions,
And embodying every source of refuge.
Put your energy into reciting the Seven-Line Prayer and the Vajra Guru mantra. At the end, recite:
Rays of light stream from the three syllables at the guru’s three centres,
And I receive his blessings, empowerments and siddhis.
The guru melts into light and dissolves into me.
Inseparable from him, I rest in a natural state of ease.