The Treasury of Blessings A Practice of Buddha Śākyamuni
Namo guru śākyamunaye!
In the Buddha, the Dharma and the Supreme Assembly
I take refuge until I attain enlightenment.
Through the merit of practising generosity and so on,
May I attain buddhahood for the benefit of all beings.
May all sentient beings enjoy happiness and the causes of happiness!
May they be free from suffering and the causes of suffering!
May they never be separated from the sacred happiness devoid of suffering!
And may they dwell in boundless equanimity that is free from attachment and aversion!
Āḥ! As the union of unborn emptiness and the ceaseless
Appearances of interdependence, magically there appears
Before me in the sky, amidst vast clouds of offerings,
On a jewelled lion throne, and lotus, sun and moon disc seats,
The incomparable teacher, Lion of the Śākyas.
His body the colour of gold, adorned with major and minor marks.
Clad in the three Dharma robes, he sits in vajra posture.
His right hand gracefully poised in the earth-touching mudrā,
And his left hand is in the gesture of meditation, holding an alms-bowl full of  nectar.
Like a mountain of gold, magnificent, he shines in splendour,
Spreading beams of wisdom light across the whole expanse of space.
The Eight Close Sons, Sixteen Elders and the like—
A vast, ocean-like retinue of noble beings encircles him all around.
Simply think of him and he grants the glory of the highest bliss:
Liberation from saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, the two extremes.
He is the Great Being, perfect embodiment of every source of refuge.
With your great compassion, you embraced this turbulent and degenerate world,
And made five hundred mighty aspirations.
You are as exalted as the white lotus; whoever hears your name shall never return to saṃsāra—
Most compassionate teacher, to you I pay homage!
All my own and others’ virtues of body, speech and mind, together with all our possessions,
Visualized like Samantabhadra’s offering clouds, I offer to you.
All the harmful actions and transgressions I have committed throughout beginningless time,
Each and every one I now confess, with intense and heartfelt regret.
In all virtuous actions, of the noble ones and ordinary beings,
Accumulated throughout the past, present and future, I rejoice.
Turn the Wheel of the profound and vast Dharma teachings,
Ceaselessly and in every direction, I pray!
Your wisdom body is like space
And remains changeless throughout past, present and future.
Yet in the perception of those to be guided, you go through the display of birth and death;
Even so, let your form body continue always to appear.
Through all the virtues I have accumulated in the past, am accumulating now and will accumulate in the future,
For the sake of benefitting all beings, who are as infinite as space,
May you, the sovereign of Dharma, be forever pleased,
And may all attain the state of the victorious one, the Lord of Dharma.
Living beings like us, adrift in this degenerate age, have no guidance and protection.
Because of your kindness, caring for us with surpassing compassion,
Every manifestation, in this world now, of the Three Jewels
Is your enlightened activity.
You are then our only refuge, incomparable, supreme;
So from our hearts we pray, with total confidence and faith:
Do not neglect the great promises you made in times gone by.
But hold us, until we attain enlightenment, with your compassion.
Supreme teacher, bhagavan, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect Buddha, glorious conqueror, Śākyamuni Buddha, to you I pay homage! To you I make offerings! In you I take refuge!
tadyathā oṃ mune mune mahāmunaye svāhā
oṃ mune mune mahāmunaye svāhā
From the Buddha’s body there emanates a great radiance, of multi-coloured rays of wisdom light, dispelling all our own and others’ obscurations,
And causing all the genuine qualities of the Mahāyāna path to arise within us, so that we attain the level of perfection from which we will never return again to saṃsāra.
Like all the buddhas and their heirs — in enlightened intention,
And in activity, aspiration, wisdom, love and capacity,
In these and all the ways unsurpassable wisdom manifests —
May I and every other being too come to be exactly as they are! 1