The Root Empowerment of the Vase Conferring Majesty The Inner Enabling Empowerment of the Heart-Essence of the Vast Expanse
Homage to the ultimate deity of natural awareness!
The gateway to the Vajra Vehicle of the Great Secret
Is empowerment; its life-force is the samaya.
The natural state is ineffable.
Therefore, in order to take care
Of extremely fortunate disciples,
Here I will reveal the Root Empowerment Conferring Majesty. Samaya!
In an excellent sacred place, isolated and joyful,
Commence the preparations for the maṇḍala.
In the centre, place a jewelled vase,
Ornamented and with a ribbon around its neck, and fill it with liquid.
On the right, place a text of this practice.
On the left, place a skull-cup filled with the secret substances.
Upon it arrange a mirror coated with sindūra.
Cover the Vajrasattva mirror 1
And the empowerment image of the consort 2 with a canopy.
Expel the obstructive forces and carry out the main practice
Of The Vidyādhara Assembly according to your capacity.
With samādhi, receive the self-initiation.
Then the students take their seats in rows.
With water from the activity vase, perform the ablution and expel the obstructive forces.
Meditate on the protective circle and relate the history.
[The students] offer a maṇḍala and make the request.
Hoḥ. Please take care of me, a fortunate child of Noble Family,
And look upon me with your great compassion.
Allow me to enter this maṇḍala of the great samaya
And bring me to maturity!
Hoḥ. This maṇḍala of the supreme secret
Is difficult to enter and the stakes are high:
Impairing the samaya will bring destruction;
So, maintain the samaya and I’ll grant you empowerment.
tiṣṭha vajra
Hūṃ. In the divine palace of the auspicious vase
Is the amṛta water indivisible from the deities,
Through which you, fortunate child, are empowered.
May clinging to appearances be perfected as the mudrā of the deities' form,
So that you attain the level of a matured vidyādhara
And reach the stage of universal radiance.
kayābhiṣiñca oṃ
Hūṃ. Red and white bodhicitta flows from the point of union
Of the male deity and consort, and fills the skull-cup.
With it, fortunate child, you are empowered.
May your channels and elements be matured into syllables,
So that you attain the level of a vidyādhara with power over life
And reach the stage of the lotus of non-attachment.
vākābhiṣiñca āḥ
Hūṃ. The source of all phenomena
Is the secret mother-consort of great bliss.
By presenting her to you, fortunate child,
May you actualize the wisdom of the four joys,
So that you attain the level of a mahāmudrā vidyādhara
And reach the stage of Great Cloud Mass of Rotating Syllables! 3
cittābhiṣiñca hūṃ
Hoḥ. On the surface of the clear mirror of primordial purity
The stainless crystal of spontaneous presence is reflected.
Through this empowerment in which symbolic indications are complete,
May you realize the natural state of immaculate awareness,
So that you attain the level of a spontaneously accomplished vidyādhara
And reach the stage of great bliss.
dharmadhātu-abhiṣiñca āḥ
Hoḥ. Dharmakāya Samantabhadra,
Saṃbhogakāya victorious ones of the five families,
Nirmāṇakāya Garab Dorje,
Master Mañjuśrīmitra,
Vidyādhara Śrī Siṃha,
Great paṇḍita Vimalamitra,
Skull-Garland Lotus 4 of Uḍḍiyāna,
Ḍākinī Yeshe Tsogyal,
King Tri Songdetsen,
Son of the victorious ones, Drime Özer, 5
Longchen Namkhai Naljor 6 and all you other root and lineage masters, glorious vidyādhara gurus, of the Natural Great Perfection,
And oceans of yidam deities and ḍākinīs,
Together with oceans of oath-bound Dharma protectors,
Come here, now, and bestow empowerment upon the vajra students!
Inspire them with your blessings,
Set their realization ablaze,
Enhance their yogic practice,
Lead them to the stronghold of the wisdom expanse of the Great Perfection, beyond actions, effort and conceptual mind, so that they attain in one life and one body the supreme rainbow body of great transference and reach the level of glorious Samantabhadra!
All the supreme root samayas of body, speech and mind,
The twenty-five branch samayas,
And the Great Perfection samayas such as absence, oneness, and suffusion,
I pledge to maintain in the proper way.
Whatever the guru, chief of the maṇḍala, commands,
I shall carry out—each and every instruction.