Secret Path to the Mountain of Glory A Prayer of Aspiration for the Copper-Coloured Mountain of Glory
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru padma siddhi hūṃ
Its nature is completely pure, beyond the conceptual mind, a primordial expanse
Where a ceaseless radiance shines, bliss and emptiness indivisible, the saṃbhogakāya’s display
Appearing as this nirmāṇakāya pure land, an aspect of our world of 'Endurance'―
May we be born on this Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!
The Vajra seat, very centre of this world of ours,
Is that sacred place where buddhas past, present and future turn the wheel of Dharma.
North-west of there lies the land of Ngayab Langké Ling―
May we be born on this Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!
A spontaneous array, a mountain rising in the shape of a heart:
Its base rests on the crown of the hooded king of the nāgas,
Its slopes throng with the formless ḍākas and ḍākinīs, celebrating the tsok feast,
Its peak reaches as far as the form realms’ states of meditative absorption―
May we be born on this Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!
On the summit of this king of mountains there rises a palace beyond all measure,
The eastern side of crystal, the south of lapis lazuli,
The west of ruby, and north of emerald;
All translucent like the arc of a rainbow, with no outside, inside or in-between―
May we be born on this Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!
Corridors, corners, and parapets pulsate in rainbow outlines,
Terraces, friezes and hanging garlands with jewels and tassels,
Water-spouts, roofs, door ornaments and porches,
The wheel of Dharma, parasol and finial: all perfect in symbols, meaning and signs―
May we be born on this Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!
Here are wish-fulfilling trees and fountains of nectar,
Green groves sweet with the fragrance of healing plants,
Where ṛṣis, vidyādharas, flocks of birds and swarms of bees,
Quiver with the sound of the Dharma of the three vehicles, mystic songs as well―
May we be born on this Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!
A palace vast and limitless, in the heart of which
On an eight-cornered jewel, a lotus and sun and moon disc seat,
Padmākara spontaneously appears, as all the sugatas in one,
Embodying the three kāyas, resplendent in an aura of rainbow light―
May we be born on this Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!
Through your wisdom of great bliss, profound and luminous,
Emptiness manifests as compassion, and as its magical display,
In every direction of space, and especially the land of Tibet,
Your emanations stream out, on and on, in their thousands and millions―
May we be born on this Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!
On your right stretch the rows of vidyādharas from India and Tibet,
Their minds suffused in the limitless Dzogchen view―‘the vajra play of luminosity’,
On your left, are the rows of scholars and saints of India and Tibet,
Their voices ring out the sounds of Dharma, revealing their experience and realization of teaching and practice―
May we be born on this Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!
Around them the king and subjects, the twenty five disciples,
Nirmāṇakāya tertöns and sovereigns among the siddhas,
Practise the cycles of the nine graded vehicles,
Keeping the yogic discipline of one-pointed, unwavering realization―
May we be born on this Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!
The four cardinal and eight intermediate directions, the corners and internal galleries, all
Are filled with ḍākas, ḍākinīs, gods and goddesses,
With their vajra hymns and dances, moving like a mirage,
Sending out clouds of offerings, outer, inner and secret―
May we be born on this Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!
Above lies the palace of the saṃbhogakāya, limitless, an array of utter beauty,
Where Padmapāṇi, Lord of the World, presides,
Encircled by an entourage that surpasses the imagination,
Utterly destroying discursive thought and habitual patterns, subtle enemies and negativity―
May we be born on this Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!
Above, in the joyful pure land of the dharmakāya,
The appearance from the ground, essence of primordial wisdom,  Samantabhadra―
As Amitābha, ‘Limitless Light’―symbolically grants teachings to an entourage no different from his own awareness,
Where teacher and disciples possess equal realization and enlightened activity―
May we be born on this Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!
At the four gates, are the four Great Kings, who keep their vows.
The eight classes of gods and demons, outer, inner and secret,
Despatched as envoys, subjugate heretics and transgressors.
An ocean of oath-bound protectors beat the victory drum to show their might―
May we be born on this Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!
Now, through the power of visualizing vividly the details of the pure land,
And aspiring with our inner awareness
Toward this external Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory,
So, inside this very body of ours, here in this world of 'Endurance',
Let our entire experience actually arise, here and now, as the Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory!
When through the profound interaction of the unique generation and completion phases,
The knots of the three channels and five centres are freed,
In the great palace of the Copper-coloured Mountain of Glory in the centre of our hearts,
May we perfect the play of the power of innate primordial wisdom
And so meet the Lord Padmākara, our own rigpa, face to face!
Within the five paths of accumulation, preparation, seeing, meditation and no-more-learning,
Through the bhūmis from ‘perfect joy’ up until ‘universal radiance’,
Then the two supreme stages of the Vajrayāna,
And especially Clear Light Dzogpachenpo’s
Extraordinary stage, the ‘unexcelled wisdom’, yeshé lama
Effortless, unaltered, and at ease, may we complete them all,
And so be liberated in the space of the ground, the Lotus Light!
Yet if we cannot perfect the full strength of realization,
Through the power of our fervent prayer and aspiration,
When death arrives with all its overpowering force,
Let the messengers of Padma, the ḍākinīs, gracefully dancing,
Actually take us by the hand,
Just as they did Kharchen Za and Guṇa Nātha, 1
And lead us to the paradise of Lotus Light!
By the truth of the dharmadhātu, utterly pure, and
Through the compassion of the ocean of Three Jewels and Three Roots,
May we accomplish all these aspirations of ours, just as we wish,
And each become a guide to lead all beings to the pure land of Lotus Light!