The Fulfiller of All Wishes The Ritual Manual from The Wish-Fulfilling Jewel Guru Heart-Practice I. The Preparation A. Taking Refuge B. Commanding the Obstructers C. Visualizing the Protection Circle D. Confessing E. Showering Down Blessings F. Consecrating the Offering Materials G. Naturally Confirming Self-Awareness II. The Main Practice A. The Generation Stage B. Summoning the Wisdom Beings C. Requesting Them to Take a Seat zhipa gü chaktsalwa ni D. Respectfully Paying Homage E. Presenting Offerings F. Rendering Praise G. The Recitation Intent 1. Opening the Recitation Mansion 2. Invoking the Wisdom Beings for the Recitation 3. Visualization for the Recitation 4. Dissolving the recitation mansion: III. The Concluding Rites A. The Gathering Offering 1. Cleansing and purifying: 2. Consecrating 3. Inviting the Field of Gathering 4. Presenting the Gathering Offering 5. Partaking of the Feast Offering 6. Making Aspirations 7. The Residual Offering B. Invoking Their Sacred Bonds C. Proclaiming the Covenant D. Hurling the Weapon Torma ( Zor ) 17 E. Offering to the Tenmas F. Performing the Horse Dance G. The Concluding Rituals 1. With one-pointed longing, request the siddhis: 2. Make offerings, express praise, and confess mistakes: 3. Dissolving the maṇḍala: 4. The dissolution and re-emergence of the completion phase: 5. Making dedication and aspiration prayers, and uttering words of auspiciousness:
namo ratnatrayāya guru deva ḍākinī vajrasamājaḥ
Namo. To the guru, embodiment of the sugatas,
Essence of the Three Jewels,
I and all six classes of beings
Go for refuge until awakening.
As my bodhicitta resolve, for the sake of all beings,
I vow that I shall become the buddha guru,
And, through all-taming activities,
I will liberate all beings!
Gurus, yidams, and ḍākinīs, please come!
Be seated, each of you, upon a throne of lotus, sun, and moon.
I pay homage to you with respectful body, speech, and mind,
And present you with outer, inner, and secret offerings.
I admit and confess violations, breaches, misdeeds, and obscurations,
And rejoice in the practice of secret mantra.
Please turn the Secret Mantra Dharma wheel of ripening and liberation,
And remain without passing into nirvāṇa!
I dedicate the essence to the welfare of beings:
May they come to realize true vajra nature!
jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
The field of accumulation dissolves into me.
I am vividly present in the form of the Great Mighty One.
oṃ hayagrīva hūṃ phaṭ
raṃ yaṃ khaṃ
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
oṃ sarvabhūta ākarṣaya jaḥ
oṃ sarva vighnān balingta khāhi
Hūṃ. By the blessings of all gurus,
By the samādhi of the yidam deities,
And by the strength of all ḍākinīs,
May the obstructers who hinder accomplishment,
The demon hordes that lead beings astray,
Not remain here, but disperse to other places!
oṃ sumbhani sumbhani hūṃ | gṛhāna gṛhāna hūṃ | gṛhānapaya gṛhānapaya hūṃ | ānaya hoḥ bhagavān vidyārājāya hūṃ phat
Hūṃ. As the Glorious One, I emanate, from my heart centre
A multitude of the five kinds of implements,
So that this immense enclosure that is the protection circle
Blazes as a wisdom bonfire.
oṃ hūṃ trāṃ hrīḥ āḥ vajra jvala rakṣa rakṣa hūṃ
Hūṃ hrīḥ. Within uncontrived basic space, all possible appearance
Arises as the wheel of the vidyādhara gurus.
Since this has been complete since the beginning within me,
I open up the symbolic door of self-awareness.
bhrūṃ jñāna prabeśaya phaṭ
Hūṃ hrīḥ. It is true that empty, aware bodhicitta
Has been deity and maṇḍala since the beginning.
I clear away the veils of deluded ignorance
And pay homage by looking directly at non-dual, primordial wisdom.
atipūhoḥ pratīccha hoḥ
Hoḥ. Although from the beginning there has been no duality,
Nonetheless, under the sway of dualistic thinking,
I have accumulated afflictions, karma, and obscurations.
All of this I confess within the uniformity of basic space.
samaya śuddhe aḥ
Hūṃ. Great bliss wisdom, guru and deity:
Here and now I realize these to be my own mind.
Within the state of indivisible basic space and awareness,
I embrace the essence of reality!
bodhicitta vajra jñāna hūṃ
Light-rays stream forth from my heart-centre,
Inviting the three secrets of the gathered Three Root deities,
Which dissolve into me, the place, and the materials,
Imbuing all with majestic blessings and splendour.
Hūṃ. From the boundless realm of dharmadhātu,
All you hosts of vidyādhara gurus, peaceful and wrathful victors,
Outer and inner ḍākinīs, and oath-bound ones,
In your love and compassion, come here to this place!
All of the samaya materials of this secret maṇḍala,
Bless them all to be the essence of wisdom body, speech, and mind!
Upon the body, speech, and mind of the practitioners gathered here,
Bestow empowerments, shower blessings, and kindle vajra wisdom!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ guru deva ḍākinī jñāna abeśaya a aḥ jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
Hūṃ hrīḥ. Raṃ yaṃ khaṃ. All impure things are purified.
In the state of emptiness, within three vessels,
From oṃ appears a torma that emanates a cloud-bank of sensory pleasures;
From āḥ appears the rakta of detachment, with frothing waves;
From hūṃ appears an amṛta ocean of fivefold wisdom;
From hrīḥ appears a multitude of outer, inner, and secret offerings.
All of these fill the sky beyond imagination.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ sarva pancha amṛta hūṃ hrīḥ tha
oṃ āḥ hūṃ mahā rakta jvala maṇḍala hūṃ hrīḥ tha
oṃ āḥ hūṃ mahā baliṃta tejo baliṃta bhala bhate guhya samaya hūṃ hrīḥ tha
oṃ vajra arghaṃ āḥ hūṃ
oṃ vajra pādyaṃ āḥ hūṃ
oṃ vajra puṣpe āḥ hūṃ
oṃ vajra dhūpe āḥ hūṃ
oṃ vajra āloke āḥ hūṃ
oṃ vajra gandhe āḥ hūṃ
oṃ vajra naivedya āḥ hūṃ
oṃ vajra śabda āḥ hūṃ
oṃ vajra sapharaṇa khaṃ
Hūṃ hrīḥ. Within the state of awakened form and wisdom—
The unity of emptiness and clarity, original self-awareness—
The tathāgata, beyond constructs and fabrication
Is consummate as the essence of the vidyādhara guru.
oṃ mahā-guru samaya hūṃ
Hūṃ hrīḥ. All phenomena are ever-free suchness,
Ineffable by way of speech or thought, and pure like space.
Within this, luminous wisdom is an all-illuminating cloud-bank,
And tender compassion, self-arisen, pervades everything.
The unity of space and awareness is the seed syllable hrīḥ ,
White with a red hue, like the rising sun in the sky.
Raṃ, yaṃ and khaṃ stream forth from it, purifying the world and beings.
As they gather back, the five essential elements are stacked in order.
Upon them, in the centre of the vast protection dome of indestructible vajras,
The seed-syllable emanates bhrūṃ : the jewel celestial palace,
Square in shape, with four gates adorned with archways,
Each one of the four colours of wisdom, utterly beautiful,
With walls of five layers, bedecked with architraves and lattice work,
Tassels, balustrades, and a jewel top ornament.
On the encircling red ledge are the bestowers of supreme bliss,
The sixteen wisdom goddesses who stream forth clouds of incredible offerings.
In this fully qualified, vast emanated realm,
In the centre of Akaniṣṭha’s Lotus Net mansion,
Upon the eight-pointed jewel that fulfills all wishes and desires,
And at the heart of a beautiful four-petalled lotus,
There lies a layered throne of multi-coloured lotus, sun, and moon.
Atop it, the seed-syllable hrīḥ transforms, in an instant,
Into the Great Guru of Uḍḍiyāna, Mighty Skull Garland,
Tamer of all drekpas —I am glorious, great, and supreme.
My body, dark brown, has a majestic air.
In my right hand I hold a skull staff and in my left a skullcup.
I stand, two legs astride, amid blazing rainbows, rays, and lights.
I send out the four classes of drekpas as my envoys. 2
I am manifest as the guru who overpowers samsāra and nirvāṇa.
Above my head, in the centre of a lotus, sun, and moon disc,
Is the Family Lord, Padmasambhava,
In the form of the guru, ruler of all maṇḍalas,
Perfection of the five wisdoms—the five poisons transmuted—
Mahāguru of Great Bliss, Dewa Chenpo.
He is white with a red hue, with a passionately loving expression,
Resplendent with the marks and signs, glorious for beings to behold.
He has one face and his two hands are in the mudrā of samādhi.
He holds an amṛta-filled skullcup, unity of bliss and emptiness,
Marked in its centre by a white syllable baṃ , the dispeller of all suffering.
He wears the white dress of secret vajra,
The dark blue gown, the three red Dharma robes,
And a brown cloak of Bengali brocade, the colour of magnetizing.
His head is beautifully adorned with the long-flap hat.
He comprises the three kāyas and is the embodiment of all victors.
Ablaze with light, his form pervades all realms
And encompasses all sugatas and their offspring.
Within a brilliance of five-coloured rainbow lights, rays, and bindus,
He is seated with his two legs crossed, displaying the equality of samsāra and nirvāṇa.
Manifest as the guru who showers down a rain of blessings,
He embodies all sources of refuge and hope—
The Three Jewels, Three Roots, and Dharma guardians of all space and time.
Around us, arranged on the four lotus petals:
In the east is Guru Padma, king of healing,
The colour of beryl, his right hand holding a sprig of myrobalan,
His left in equipoise, holding an amṛta-filled vessel.
He is surrounded by the sages of the four families, each holding the supreme medicine. 3
He is manifest as the guru who dispels the anguish of afflictions.
In the south is Guru of the Wealth Gods, king of power,
Golden in colour, holding a glowing jewel in his right hand
And a skullcup that bestows the greatest of all wishes in his left.
He is surrounded by the four Wealth Lords 4 , each holding a wish-granting jewel.
He is manifest as the guru who dispels the anguish of poverty.
In the west is Guru of the Yidams, the magnetizing king,
The colour of ruby, holding a lotus in his right hand
And a casket of inexhaustible treasure in his left,
With a retinue of four Treasure Guardians, the bestowers of siddhis. 5
He is manifest as the guru who fulfills all aims.
In the north is Guru of Practitioners, the hope-fulfilling king,
The colour of an emerald, his right hand holding a banner aloft
And his left brandishing a kīla at obstacles and obstructers.
Surrounded by the four local deities, all wielding banners, 6
He is manifest as the guru who guides beings onto the path.
Around them, upon the eight points of the jewel:
In the east is Guru Sovereign of Warrior Kiṃkaras,
Radiant white, playing a skull-ḍamaru with his right hand
And holding an amṛta-filled skullcup in his left.
The four heroic kiṃkaras 7 who surround him beat skull-drums and ring bells.
He is manifest as the guru who tames the wicked.
In the south is Guru King and Master of the Four Elements
Brilliant ultramarine, his right hand holding a vase in the shape of Mount Meru
And his left holding lassos of wind and fire.
The goddesses of the four elements surround him, 8 holding earth, water, wind, and fire.
He is manifest as the guru who dispels all obstacles.
In the west is Ferocious Guru, exorcist of evil spirits,
Radiant red, his right hand brandishing a hook and lasso,
And his left hand binding with shackles while ringing a bell.
Surrounding him, the wrathful emissaries, replete with the four mudrās, send out envoys. 9
He is manifest as the guru who subdues all terrors.
In the north is Vajra-Armoured Guru,
Radiant gold, his right hand raising a sword as if to strike,
And his left catching the wicked with a hook at their heart.
Surrounded by his retinue, the four demon-taming wrathful ladies, 10
He is manifest as the unchanging, indestructible guru.
In the southeast is Guru Dispeller of the Pain of Death,
Red, with his right hand outstretched in the refuge-granting mudrā,
While his left, in the mudrā of supreme giving, holds a bowl filled with amṛta.
Surrounded by his retinue, the four bodhisattvas who tame beings, 11
he is manifest as the guru who guides beings to Sukhāvatī, the pureland of bliss.
In the southwest is Guru Defeater of the Bardo’s Delusions,
Orange in colour, holding a five-pronged vajra in his right hand,
And a mirror with peacock feathers in his left.
Surrounded by the four Acalas, annihilators of dualistic fixation, 12
He is manifest as the guru of self-liberated illusions.
In the northwest is Guru Purifier of the Pain of Rebirth,
Red-green, with a blazing curved knife in his right hand,
And an amṛta-filled skullcup in his left.
Surrounded by the four Lords of Secrets who lead all beings out of the lower realms, 13
He is manifest as the guru who purifies negative rebirths.
In the northeast is Guru Refuge of the Six Classes of Beings,
Pale green, holding a nine-pronged vajra in his right hand
And a khaṭvāṅga trident as a staff in his left.
Surrounded by the four ḍākinīs who each hold their own emblem, 14
He is manifest as the guru who dispels the anguish of existence.
All these thirteen power-wielding vidyādharas
Wear an innermost white secret dress,
And on top of that a dark blue gown and red Dharma robes.
They wear the lotus crown, with their two legs standing upright
Upon lotus and moon discs in the stance of bodhisattvas taming beings.
Bringing a shower of siddhis, they pulse with majestic splendour.
At the four gates, on lotuses, sun discs, and criss-crossed four māras are:
Hūṃkara at the eastern portal, white, holding a hook;
Acala at the southern portal, yellow, holding a lasso;
Hayagrīva at the western portal, maroon, holding shackles;
And Amṛtakuṇḍalī at the northern portal, green, ringing a bell.
They are all in wrathful form, with their right hands raised in the threatening mudrā.
Wearing complete charnel ground attire, amid a blazing mass of fire,
They send out envoys and guard against obstacles.
Filling all the remaining space in the maṇḍala, gathering like cloud-banks
Are the victorious sugatas of the three times and their offspring,
The multitude of vidyādhara gurus, deities, and ḍākinīs,
And an ocean of oath-bound messengers.
This unchanging and indestructible state of luminous essence
Is endowed with the five wisdoms that are the afflictions self-liberated.
Perfected as the maṇḍala of vajra body, speech, and mind,
It is the original purity of the aggregates, elements, and sense sources.
oṃ hūṃ traṃ hrīḥ āḥ
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Hūṃ hrīḥ. In the past, in this Jambu Continent,
In Uḍḍiyāna’s bright northwest,
On the heart of a lotus flower,
You came, renowned as Lotus Born,
Your supreme siddhi wondrous,
With your retinue of ḍākinīs.
I will follow you to accomplishment,
So come forth and bestow your blessings!
Hūṃ. At the centre of the isle of Cāmara to the southwest,
Upon the peak of Copper-Coloured Mountain
In your boundless palace, Lotus Light—
O Māhaguru, Mighty Skull Garland,
King of Great Bliss, come forth from basic space!
You who dispel all outer and inner suffering,
You who bestow the supreme and longed for siddhis—
Lord, with your retinue, emanations, and re-emanations,
I invite you here. I beseech you, come!
Bestow resplendence upon this supreme place!
Bestow the four empowerments upon us, supreme yogis!
Remove all obstructers, false guides, and hindrances,
And bestow the supreme and common siddhis!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru padma totreng tsal vajra samaya jaḥ siddhi phala hūṃ āḥ hrīḥ ma harinisa raca hriya citta hriṇ hriṇ jaḥ jaḥ
Hūṃ hrīḥ. In this beautiful jeweled mansion,
Upon thrones of suns, moons, and lotus flowers,
Assembly of Mahāguru deities,
Joyful and steadfast, please remain!
jñāna samaya tiṣṭha lhan
Namo. Without arising, ceasing, or changing, you perfect all activities.
Your self-existing compassion frees all beings.
Like a wish-fulfilling jewel, you shower down a rain of siddhis.
Assembly of vidyādharas, I pay homage to you!
atipūhoḥ pratīccha hoḥ
From my heart centre, goddesses
Stream out, filling the whole of space,
Presenting clouds of offerings—outer, inner,
Secret, and specific—limitless as the ocean's expanse.
Hūṃ hrīḥ. To the host of gurus, deities, and ḍākinīs
I present the outer offerings, all formed of divine substances:
Drinking water, rinsing water for the feet, flowers,
Incense, lights, scented water, food, and music.
I present the inner offerings: form, sound, smell, taste,
Texture, and phenomena, the five sense pleasures.
I present the secret offerings: the play of the four joys
Of the sixteen wisdom consorts, and the unity of union and liberation.
I present offerings of that which dispels the five poisons—
Deathless amṛta made of the eight root substances and the thousand subsidiary ones.
In order to increase empty bliss, I present offerings of rakta,
The attachment-free great red, with lathering garlands of the foam of desire.
I present offerings of wondrous torma,
The bali of the sense pleasures of all possible appearance utterly pure.
By these ocean-like offering clouds, dharmatā's display,
May the sacred bonds with the three roots be fulfilled;
May all suffering—outer, inner, and secret—be appeased;
And may you bestow upon us the supreme and common siddhis, just as we wish!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru deva ḍākinī saparivāra arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naividya śabda pratīccha svāhā
mahā sukha pañca kāma guṇa tana gaṇa pūja hoḥ mahā amṛta rakta baliṇta khakha khāhi khāhi
Recalling the deities’ qualities,
Together with the vajra goddesses
I sing this song of praise:
Hūṃ hrīḥ. In the dharmakāya state that's unfabricated and originally pure,
Your delight in innate great bliss and luminosity is replete,
And your cognizant power of compassion is a dance of the illusory net.
To you, the three-kāya gurus, I offer homage and praise!
Hūṃ hrīḥ. Luminous all-ground, bodhicitta of self-awareness,
Chief of all maṇḍalas, you who perfect the power of qualities,
Lord guru, you who embody the buddhas of the three times—
To this all-pervading lord, Great Bliss, I offer homage and praise!
Wish-fulfilling jewel, embodiment of great bliss,
You blaze with self-arisen wisdom and its physical marks and signs,
Free of stains, radiant white, with the red glow of compassion.
Your one face is the singular essence, your two hands are means and knowledge.
In unwavering meditation, your hands are in the mudrā of equipoise.
You hold a wish-granting skull, the indivisibility of appearance and emptiness,
Filled with amṛta, undefiled great bliss.
It is marked with the unchanging syllable baṃ , dispeller of all suffering.
As the complete perfection of all nine vehicles, you wear a secret white dress
And, on top, a blue-black gown and red Dharma robes.
As glorious subjugator of all possible appearance, you wear a brown cloak of Bengali brocade.
Replete with the empowerments of the three seats, you sport the long-flap hat that liberates upon sight.
Pervading the whole of samsāra and nirvāṇa, you are seated amidst an expanse of rainbows, rays, and bindus,
Upon a ravishing seat of lotus, sun, and moon disc,
With your two legs fully crossed, the unity of the two truths.
The kāyas and pure realms of the victors and their offspring
Of all the ten directions and all four times are complete within your vajra body.
You shower down a rain of the sacred Dharma; your wisdom heart embodies all vidyādharas;
Your qualities surpass thought; your activities are as pervasive as space.
By thinking of you, our anguish is dispelled and we are led onto awakening’s path.
You, Padmasambhava, supreme granter of all wishes,
All-pervasive Great Bliss Lord, I offer you homage and praise!
Hūṃ hrīḥ. From the single, luminous, innate wisdom,
The unobstructed display arises as the thirteen tamers of beings.
Like excellent vases, wish-fulfilling trees and jewels,
You fulfill the hopes and wishes of countless beings to be tamed.
Supreme Mighty Guru, you avert war with the Mongols;
Guru Supreme Healer, you dispel the ailments of the afflictions;
Guru King of Power, you shower down enjoyments;
Guru of the Supreme Deity, you bestow all siddhis;
Guru Treasure of Compassion, you show practitioners the path;
Guru Sovereign of the Kiṃkaras, you grant protection from fears;
Guru King of Space, you bring the four elements under control;
Guru Sovereign of Mudrās, you bind the wicked and wild;
Guru Vajra King, you win the war against the demons;
Guru Boundless Light, you dispel the anguish of death;
Guru Knower of the Three Times, you bring self-occurring liberation in the intermediate state;
Guru King of Great Bliss, you lead all beings out of the lower realms;
Guru Mighty Skull Garland, you protect and guard all beings of the six classes.
You manifest from dharmadhātu in these wisdom forms of love and care,
Appearing to beings, as needed, as the magical, illusory net,
As the five kāyas, the eight manifestations, the thirteen emanations, and so forth.
Assembly of guru vidyādharas, I offer you homage and praise!
Four gatekeepers, wrathful kings, you conquer the four demons.
Holding hook, lasso, shackles, and bell,
You overcome all fears, obstacles, and suffering—
To the great, glorious annihilators, I offer homage and praise!
Moreover, victorious ones, your offspring, vidyādharas in all times and directions,
Deities, vīras, ḍākinīs, and hosts of Dharma protectors,
You who dispel all obstacles and shower down a rain of siddhis—
I bow down and salute you, who revel in dharmadhātu!
bhrūṃ viśviśuddhe sarva mahā guru phaṭ jaḥ
From the resounding thrum of the vajra mantra,
The wisdom maṇḍala opens up in front.
With the rings of fire touching,
Joyfully and firmly they are seated.
Hūṃ hrīḥ. In the guru’s pure realm, unchanging luminous essence,
In the centre of the palace of great bliss, self-arisen and naturally present,
Upon a beautiful seat of lotus, sun, and moon,
Sits the primordial protector, Guru of Great Bliss.
He is with emanations, re-emanations, and retinue.
All are empty appearances, beautiful forms ablaze with marks and signs, faces smiling.
The empty sound of their melodious voices rumbles like thunder with the sound of mantra.
Their empty awareness is the supreme wisdom heart of unwavering realization.
Until such clarity is attained, I will strive in generation and recitation,
And not give up the samādhi until I reach accomplishment.
Arouse the great force of your constant compassion,
And help us to swiftly achieve the twofold siddhi!
Hūṃ hrīḥ. In the heart-centres of the vidyādhara gurus
Are lotuses and moon discs, on top of which stand five-pronged vajras.
In the centre of each is the syllable hrīḥ , blazing bright with the colour of the deity’s family.
Surrounding the syllable is the encircling garland of the essence mantra,
The quintessence of the twelve aspects of the Buddha’s speech.
From it, immeasurable light rays radiate outwards, filling the whole of space.
They carry offerings to the victors, purify the karmic obscurations of beings,
And gather back blessings of wisdom and love from the sugatas and their offspring.
The blessings dissolve into me, and I am graced with wisdom body, speech, and mind.
They bear offerings to the deities and gurus, and delight them thus.
Mend all transgressions and breaches with vajra siblings and consorts!
Enjoin all the ḍākinīs and Dharma protectors to their activities!
Uplift and glorify all those in Tibet and Kham who are working for the good!
Bind under oath all the gods and spirits on the dark side!
Grind to dust the damsi spirits! 15
The four activities—pacifying, increasing, magnetizing, and subjugating—are naturally and spontaneously carried out.
The eight great siddhis and the ten-power wisdom are strengthened and increased.
All possible appearance is the maṇḍala and deities of the vidyādhara gurus.
All sounds are the self-resounding thrum of mantra.
Awareness is luminous great bliss, open and unobstructed.
Within this state, all obstacles subside, all suffering is liberated in its own place,
And upon this very seat I attain the two types of siddhi,
Fully and completely.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru padma siddhi hūṃ
Hūṃ hrīḥ. To the assembly of vidyādharas, the gathering of guru deities,
I present the outer, inner, and secret recitation offerings.
Recollecting your qualities, I praise you in vajra song.
I apologize for all breaches. Please bestow the supreme and common siddhis!
mahāmṛta rakta balingta khāhi
From the heart centres of each of the front-visualized deities,
Appear replicas and multitudes of light rays.
The sky is filled with this radiating and reabsorbing
Which spontaneously brings to fruition all desired aims.
oṃ sarva mahāguru maṇḍala jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
All the wisdom deities
Present in front dissolve into me,
Blessing me as indivisible from
Their wisdom body, speech, mind, qualities, and activities.
jñāna kāya vāk citta guṇa karma svabhāva ātma ko ‘haṃ
Hūṃ . Raṃ yaṃ khaṃ are emanated out of the expression of self-awareness.
They burn, scatter, and wash away the tendencies to view the gathering articles as real.
They are transformed into primordially pure, unconditioned basic space,
The great state of unfabricated clarity, perfect and complete.
raṃ yaṃ khaṃ
Hūṃ. Within the state of empty clarity, in the skull of means and insight,
Are the five meats and five amṛtas, which are actually the five wisdoms and families.
Fire and wind combine, and melt them into the samaya materials,
From which ocean-like cloud-banks of sense pleasures stream forth.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Hūṃ hrīḥ. Assembly of victorious three roots, appearing out of invisible space,
Like a rainbow arises unobstructed in the sky,
I invite you to this wisdom gathering. Please approach!
Accept these sensory pleasure offerings and bestow the siddhis!
Hūṃ hrīḥ. From the Lotus Light pure realm in the southwest,
Great Bliss One, embodiment of all the vidyādhara gurus,
Together with your ocean-like retinue of Three Roots,
I invite you as the wisdom gathering. Please approach!
Your wisdom forms are dancing, delighted, flowing beautifully,
And the melodious tones of your wisdom speech ring out continuously;
Your wisdom hearts are vivid, lucid, in the great bliss of wisdom;
Your retinue of ḍākinīs and vīras gather in billowing clouds around you;
The sweet scent of incense wafts in fragrant, drifting clouds;
Rainbow rays, lights, and bindus beam forth brightly;
A rain of divine flowers patters blissfully down;
And all is accompanied and heralded by vajra song and music.
Please come, ever swiftly, here to this place!
Transform the gathering hall into an emanated pure realm;
Bestow the supreme empowerment upon the practitioners—all male and female deities;
Consecrate the gathering substances as the amṛta of primordial wisdom;
Transform all conduct into the continuous play of great bliss;
And make it so the supreme and common siddhis, fully and without exception,
Are spontaneously accomplished! I beseech you, enact these awakened deeds!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ sarva mahā guru maṇḍala saparivāra vajra samājaḥ
དང་པོ་ཕུད་ཀྱིས་མཆོད་པ་ནི༔
This involves, first, the offering of the best portion:
Hūṃ hrīḥ. To the vidyādhara gurus and maṇḍala deities of the Three Roots,
I present this gathering offering possessed of five sensory pleasures.
Accept it with joy and, I beseech you,
Spontaneously fulfill all wishes—outer, inner, and secret!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ sarva mahā guru maṇḍala saparivāra gaṇacakra pūja khāhi
བར་པ་བསྐང་ཞིང་བཤགས་པ་ནི༔
For the second, middle offering, the fulfillment and confession:
Hūṃ hrīḥ. Within this eminent maṇḍala of the secret charnel ground,
I have arranged the secret maṇḍala in accordance with the scriptures.
Through these properly displayed sacred articles of accomplishment,
May the sacred bonds with the vidyādhara gurus be fulfilled!
May the sacred bonds with the assembly of yidam deities be fulfilled!
May the sacred bonds with the vīras and ḍākinīs be fulfilled!
May the sacred bonds with the Dharma protectors and guardians be fulfilled!
May the sacred bonds with everyone worthy of veneration be fulfilled!
Hūṃ hrīḥ. Within basic space, originally pure, primordial wisdom is beyond meeting and parting;
May the sacred bonds with the gurus of the victors’ Wisdom Lineage be fulfilled!
From the state of spontaneous presence, the great bliss kāyas of awareness are naturally present;
May the sacred bonds with the gurus of the vidyādhara's Sign Lineage be fulfilled!
Its natural dynamic expression, the nirmāṇakāya emanations, serves the aims of the six types of beings;
May the sacred bonds with the gurus of the Oral Lineage of Humans be fulfilled!
Sealed with aspirations, treasures and teachings were entrusted to the ḍākinīs;
May the sacred bonds with the ḍākinīs of the Entrustment Seal Lineage be fulfilled!
Through the force of karmic links, they partake of the profound treasures;
May the sacred bonds with the gurus of the Treasure Lineage of Destined Transmission be fulfilled!
They broadcast far and wide the instructions that are the representatives of the Guru’s wisdom speech;
May the sacred bonds with the gurus of the Yellow Scroll Word Lineage be fulfilled!
They perfectly accomplish learning and teaching, meditation and practice, and the twofold aim;
May the sacred bonds with the Lineage of Blessed Pith Instructions be fulfilled!
May the sacred bonds with the buddhas of past, present, and future,
Knowers of all things throughout all times, be fulfilled!
May the sacred bonds with the sacred Dharma, the wisdom teachings
That guide all beings to the state of peace and bliss, be fulfilled!
May the sacred bonds with the noble sangha, upholders of the doctrine
Who abide on the stages and paths, be fulfilled!
May the sacred bonds with the supreme beings, the gurus who are endowed
With the supreme view, meditation, and wisdom, be fulfilled!
May the sacred bonds with the host of yidam deities,
Who bestow unimpededly the two types of siddhis, be fulfilled!
May the sacred bonds with the ḍākinīs and oath-bound ones,
Who dispel all obstacles, outer, inner, and secret, be fulfilled!
May the sacred bonds with the Wealth Gods and Treasure Owners,
Who bestow upon practitioners all the enjoyments they desire, be fulfilled!
May the sacred bonds with the land owners and local deities,
Who further the good and imbue the environment and its inhabitants with splendour, be fulfilled!
All possible appearance is the manifest ground, the realm of boundless purity.
May the sacred bonds with all guests, of both existence and peace, be fulfilled!
Hūṃ hrīḥ. The substances for fulfilling the sacred bonds with the host of maṇḍala deities
Are present both materially and emanated from the mind:
With flowers, incense, lamps, scented water and more—
Outer offerings of heavenly substances—may the sacred bonds be fulfilled!
With form, sound, smell, taste, texture, mental phenomena and more—
Inner offerings, self-arisen—may the sacred bonds be fulfilled!
With non-dual blissful union and liberation of duality into basic space—
Secret offerings, naturally present—may the sacred bonds be fulfilled!
With amṛta medicine, rakta, and bali—
Extraordinary offerings, supreme—may the sacred bonds be fulfilled!
With this gathering circle of vast, ocean-like clouds of sensory pleasures,
This wondrous samaya offering, may the sacred bonds be fulfilled!
All the sacred bonds are fulfilled! Please forgive our violations and breaches!
Pacify the outer, inner, and secret obstacles,
And bestow the siddhi of spontaneous fulfillment of all wishes!
Hoḥ. Though all is pure from the beginning within the non-dual dharmakāya,
Under the sway of ignorance we have projected and denigrated,
And so we experience myriad ripenings of pleasure and pain.
To counteract all this, to turn it back, we have taken vows from the victors—
The personal liberation, bodhisattva, and mantra precepts—
And we have pledged to keep them and practice correctly.
Yet due to ignorance, the afflictions, disrespect, and lack of care,
Whatever transgressions we may have committed,
We confess them with this outer, inner, and secret gathering offering.
As we openly admit our mistakes, with intense regret and remorse,
Please absolve all our transgressions and breaches
And bestow upon us, I beseech you, the siddhi of perfect purity!
ཐ་མ་བསྒྲལ་ཞིང་བསྟབ་པ་ནི༔
The final portion, the liberation and its offering:
Through the recitation of hūṃ , instantaneously
All possible appearance arises as the wrathful maṇḍala.
Dispatched messengers capture the hordes of foes and obstructers
And dissolve them into the physical support.
e ṇri tri sarva shatrūn bighanān jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
Hūṃ. I am Pema Drakpo Tsel,
Rolling Kīla Supreme Son in my hands.
As I stab the hearts of foes and obstructers,
They are vanquished, ground to dust.
Their lifespan and merit dissolve into me,
Their consciousness is ejected into dharmadhātu.
I cut the root of the five aggregates and poisons,
Transforming them into great wisdom amṛta.
oṃ padma śrī heruka kīli kīlaya sarva shatrūn bighanān māraya phaṭ
Hūṃ. Deities of the vidyādhara maṇḍala, open wide your mouths!
Accept this amṛta offering of the liberated flesh and blood
Of all foes and obstructers who harm the doctrine,
And deliver them into the basic space of samsāra-nirvāṇa equality!
mahā māṃsa rakta kimni riti khāhi
Hoḥ. Revel in this feast offering as an adornment!
a la la hoḥ
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ. My body, appearing as the deity,
Partakes of all sense pleasures as the enjoyment of great bliss.
Thereby, my subtle channels and elements are filled with the pure essence of amṛta,
And the deities of my body-maṇḍala are delighted.
Hoḥ. By making this gathering offering
To the maṇḍala of vidyādhara gurus,
May I and all beings, as infinite as space,
Accomplish the wisdom kāya of great bliss!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Through symbolic language, all the residual recipients,
Gathering like billowing clouds, make their arrival.
e ā ralli hring hring pheng pheng
Hūṃ hrīḥ. Host of ḍākinīs and loyal protectors who took oaths
In the presence of the vidyādhara gurus,
Gather here, just as you promised that you would.
Accept this residual torma of wisdom amṛta.
Enjoy it with delight, and in accord with your pledge
Carry out the four activities!
ucchiṣṭa balingta khāhi
Hūṃ hrīḥ. Gathering of vidyādhara gurus, the natural dynamic expression of dharmadhātu,
Victors gone in bliss, peaceful and wrathful deities, all of you without exception,
And the assembly of Dharma protectors and oath-bound ones, I invoke your sacred bonds!
Do not forsake us! Do not delay, but carry out the activities as we entreat you!
Hūṃ hrīḥ. Long, long ago, in the time of the first eon,
In the Palace of Unexcelled, dharmadhātu beyond fabrication,
When the dharmakāya guru Samantabhadra
Turned the Dharma wheel that is the view of self-appearances,
The five family lords and ladies, the bodhisattvas, and consorts
Vividly displayed the supreme wisdom kāya,
And you then made pledges—please do not forget these sacred bonds,
But partake of this proffered torma of undefiled amṛta
And carry out the activity of pacifying dualistic fixation into basic space!
After that, in the middle, intermediate eon,
In the palace of luminosity's vast array,
When the sambhogakāya gurus, the five family lords and ladies,
Turned the symbolic Dharma wheel of great bliss,
The boundless peaceful and wrathful vīras and ḍākinīs
Lucidly displayed the supreme vajra-kāya,
And you then made pledges—please do not forget these sacred bonds,
But partake of this proffered torma of sensory pleasures,
And carry out the activity of spreading the strength of primordial wisdom!
After that, in the final intermediate eon,
In the palace of taming beings in unfixed ways,
When the nirmāṇakāya gurus, the infinite Lotus-Born Ones,
Turned the Dharma wheel according to the needs of those to be tamed,
The vajra Dharma guardians of great might
Vividly displayed their supreme, individual forms.
And you then made pledges—please do not forget these sacred bonds,
But partake of this proffered torma of profound promises
And enact the activity of magnetizing everything excellent, all conducive conditions!
Here in this final age of conflict and strife,
The Lotus Guru of Great Bliss
Hid the two Guru Heart-Practices as treasures
And through the power of aspirations they were revealed and spread.
Here and now, as I practice these teachings accordingly,
Ocean of oath-bound ones, the Teaching and Treasure Protectors,
Come hither through the force of your individual sacred bonds
And, without transgressing your vows, but keeping to them,
Partake of this proffered torma of the flesh and blood of foes and obstructers,
And enact the wrathful activity of annihilating everything unconducive!
Hūṃ Assembly of vidyādhara gurus, victors, and peaceful and wrathful ones,
I call upon your profound sacred bonds, each and every one!
Ocean of ḍākinīs and oath-bound ones, set forth and get to work!
Eight classes of gods and spirits, head out swiftly as servants and messengers!
Hurl this mighty torma weapon that I have loaded
Upon all wicked foes and obstructers,
And grind them to dust, for seven generations to come!
Avert all outer, inner, and secret sufferings,
All curses, spells, obstacles, and hindrances!
Avert them all with this wrathful torma!
Carry out the wrathful, subjugating activities!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru mahā krodha ayama duru caśana sarva samaya joh joh dok dok
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Joḥ Host of Tenmas, who look over Tibet and Kham,
Come with your retinues, come here to this place!
In the past, Ācārya Padma, the Lotus Master,
And Langchen Palkyi Sengé
In the supreme sacred location of Yangleshö
Issued you with a command and bound you under oath.
In accordance with that, come hither! Come hither, gathering of guardian goddesses!
Together with your retinues of emanations, re-emanations, and aides,
Partake of this rinsing-water amṛta
And establish the whole of Tibet and Kham, from centre to edge,
In well-being and bliss
And make this profound treasure teaching flourish!
padma dhākinī idaṃ baliṇta khāhi
e ṇri tri sarva bighanān bināyaka jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
Hūṃ . With the great horse observance,
I assume the awesome form of the Mighty One.
I sound the piercing neigh of the horse, and slash with weapons,
Grinding foes, obstructers, and samaya transgressors to dust.
As I perform the dance of the three liberations,
The three poisons and their traces are purified in their own place,
Liberated into wisdom body, speech, and mind,
And dissolved into the expanse of great perfection.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ satvaṃ bhaya laṃ nan
Hūṃ hrīḥ . Three kāyas indivisible, embodiment of boundless Three Roots,
Guru of Great Bliss, just recalling you dispels our anguish.
Emanations of the victorious ones, assemblies of vidyādharas:
With overwhelming longing and deepest devotion
We first engaged in the approach and then, one-pointedly, in accomplishment.
Now, as we invoke your great compassion,
Bestow the supreme siddhis of wisdom body, speech, mind, and union,
Which are like the excellent vase that grants all wishes,
Like the mighty king of wish-fulfilling jewels.
Bestow them upon us right here and now—
The unchanging, indestructible vajra siddhis—
And let the two aims be spontaneously accomplished!
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru padma siddhi hūṃ kāya vāk citta sarva siddhi pala hūṃ āḥ
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ . To the maṇḍala deities of the vidyādhara gurus,
I present an oceanic cloud-bank, of outer, inner, and secret offerings,
Both material and imagined,
And I praise your wisdom mind, speech, mind, qualities, and activities!
mahā amṛta rakta balingta sarva pūja āḥ hūṃ
Hoḥ. While engaging in approach, accomplishment, and activities,
Whatever additions or omissions I have made to the ritual, whatever errors and mistakes,
I confess them all within the reference-free expanse of dharmadhātu!
Bestow, I beseech you, the siddhi of supreme purity!
Hūṃ hūṃ hūṃ. All possible appearances dissolve into the maṇḍala circle,
Which then dissolves into me, and I into hrīḥ .
The syllable hrīḥ dissolves into the luminous reference-free expanse,
And I let be within the continuous state in which whatever arises is beyond fabrication.
Phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ. Once more I am the wisdom form of great bliss,
Endowed with the vajra armour of the unchanging three secrets.
Whatever appears is perfect and complete as the maṇḍala circle of the guru.
Within this continuous state, I shall work constantly to benefit all beings.
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra kāvāci rakṣa haṃ
Hoḥ. All the merit resulting from practicing the vidyādhara guru
I dedicate to the mindstreams of all beings!
May they all perfect the qualities of the stages and paths,
And quickly attain the state of the King of Great Bliss!
Oṃ. The source of all goodness is the perfect buddha;
The amṛta that dispels the anguish of afflictions is the sacred Dharma;
The supreme field of merit is the noble assembly of victors and their offspring—
May there be the auspiciousness of the unsurpassable Three Jewels!
The Lord Guru gathers clouds of blessings in the sky;
The peaceful and wrathful yidams rain down showers of siddhis;
And the assembly of ḍākinīs ripen the crops of aims and wishes—
May the auspiciousness of the Three-Root maṇḍala deities abound!
The uncontrived, construct-free, luminous dharmadhātu
Radiates billowing cloud-banks of the five family buddhas, the wisdom of great bliss,
A treasury of compassion benefiting beings according to their needs—
May there be the auspiciousness of the host of Three-kāya deities!
In the meantime, may all outer and inner decline be pacified,
May all wishes for benefit and bliss be spontaneously fulfilled,
And ultimately may we accomplish the indivisible unity of the kāyas and wisdoms—
The supreme siddhi! May there be the auspiciousness of this!