A Prayer to Tārā for Averting Obstructive Circumstances
Oṃ. Glorious one, as I recall your name,
Act swiftly to pacify all fears and dangers.
Supreme giver, effortlessly bestowing twofold benefit,
Exalted and reverend Tārā, to you I pray.
Tyrants, fires, drowning, captivity, poison and weaponry,
Snakes, lions, elephants and flesh-eating spirits,
Thieves, robbers, demons, elemental forces, zombies and the rest—
To Tārā, who guards against all such dangers, I pray.
For those whose power of life is depleted,
Or who are shrouded in delusion’s darkness,
You display your radiant moon-like face and immediately
Bestow longevity and wisdom—to you, I pray.
Brilliant red, with a hook of ruby-coloured light rays,
You capture all that is excellent in existence and peace.
Great sovereign, enduring and universally powerful—
To Tārā, who is swift and courageous, I pray.
Never wavering from peace, you wear a frown
Of compassionate wrath and proclaim the sound of Hūṃ.
Vanquisher of all māras and obstructing forces—
To Tārā, who is magnificent and ferocious, I pray.
Intoxicated with bliss, you roar with laughter,
And stamping both feet, thoroughly suppress
The seven worlds and overpower the three realms.
To you whose victory is unbounded, I pray.
For those who are lacking in wealth
You bring vast showers of varied riches
And eliminate all the suffering of poverty.
To you, who are noble and perfectly generous, I pray.
Utterly freed from saṃsāra’s major flaws,
You’ve reached the highest level of untainted joy
And revel in enduring, untransferable great bliss.
To you, the powerful and perfectly ethical, I pray.
Embracing the welfare of beings as limitless as space,
You endure harm and injury with earth-like equanimity,
Never angry but always full of compassion,
To you, the peaceful and tolerant of hardship, I pray.
Never faltering even for a moment,
Your enthusiasm for freeing beings is intense
And continues until saṃsāra is emptied.
To you, the diligent liberator of beings, I pray.
Taking delight in an ocean of unmoving absorption,
You’ve pacified all forms of conceptual thought,
And savour the taste of unmediated great bliss.
To you, the great adept of concentration, I pray.
Directly seeing all dharmas, profound and vast,
You possess inexhaustible, ocean-like wisdom,
And vast qualities equal to those of the buddhas.
To you, Tārā of perfect wisdom, I pray.
Through the power of this, my constant and devoted prayer to you,
May you afford me and other beings protection from every obstacle.
And may all be auspicious, so that we are ever in Tārā’s care
And the twofold aims of self and other are spontaneously accomplished.