The Iron Tree of Immortality A Guru Yoga Focusing on the Glorious Drukpa Ngawang Namgyal 1. Preliminaries Taking Refuge Generating Bodhicitta 2. Main Part Prayer that Swiftly Invokes Compassion 3. Conclusion
Namo guru-padmākarāya!
Together with all mother sentient beings, as infinite as space, I take refuge in the Guru, the Dharmakāya Buddha;
I take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha;
I take refuge in the Gurus, Yidam deities and Ḍākinīs;
I take refuge in the dharmakāya, the inseparable emptiness and clarity of my own mind.
For the sake of all sentient beings, I shall do whatever I can to ensure that I may swiftly reach the precious level of the great Vajradhara with the seven aspects of union in this brief lifetime during the degenerate age.
To that end, I shall hold this profound path, the yoga of the guru as the deity, as the vital core of my practice and thereby attain the level of a vidyādhara of immortal life.
Out of the dharmākāya expanse, primordially pure and spontaneously present, as its own ceaseless creative power, I emerge as supreme Hayagrīva, perfect in the instant of recollection. He is dark red in colour, intensely wrathful, with the form of a rākṣasa. His right hand holds a club, and from the fingers of his left hand, which is in the threatening mudrā, shoot powerful flames that incinerate demonic and obstructing forces.
His two legs are in the heroic posture, trampling upon the hearts of male and female rudras.
A green horse’s head neighs at his crown, and he is adorned with the eight attributes of splendour.
Above my head, amidst a pavilion of light, on a jewelled throne supported by eight great lions and marked with crossed vajras, upon the skin of an antelope,
And seats of multicoloured lotus, moon and sun, representing illusory body, luminosity and union,
Is the embodiment of the compassion of all the buddhas of the three times, my root guru of threefold kindness, in the form of the Vajradhara Ngawang Namgyal, who is white with a reddish glow.
He gazes piercingly, and has a wrathful smile and grey eyebrows, moustache and long beard.
His rounded belly rests upon his crossed legs.
He sits upright, with stout physique and legs crossed in  vajra posture.
He is dressed in the three dharma robes and a magnificent cloak decorated with auspicious patterns.
He has a red meditation belt symbolizing the wisdom of emptiness.
On his head he wears a red hat adorned with gold, turquoise and pearls.
His two hands are in the gesture of meditative equipoise and hold a red long-life vase filled with the nectar of immortality and adorned at the top with a beautiful wish-fulfilling tree complete with flowers and fruit.
He has such presence that he prevails over the three planes of existence.
In his heart is the great master of Oḍḍiyāna in the form of a sixteen-year-old ācārya, with a five-pronged golden vajra in his right hand;
His left hand is in the gesture of equipoise and holding a kapala , while in the crook of his left arm he holds a khaṭvāṅga trident.
He is in scholarly costume, with the three dharma robes and the dark red hat of a paṇḍita, and is seated in the posture of ease.
At his heart, within united subtle red and white essences, upon a moon-disc seat, is an orange syllable hrīḥ , complete with visarga . 1
At the guru’s crown, within a tent of iridescent light, is the lord of the family, Amitābha-Amitāyus, complete with all adornments and costume.
His two hands are in the gesture of equanimity, holding a vase filled with the nectar of immortality.
Rays of light emanate from the syllable hrīḥ at the guru’s heart and invite the precious guru, together with the hosts of vīras and ḍākinīs who have attained the level of deathless awareness-holder, from the realms of wondrous qualities above,
From Ngayab Ling in the southwest,
And from Bhutan, Land of the Thunder Dragon, the sacred place of Kunzang Dechen and elsewhere.
My own guru in the form of Ngawang Namgyal,
No matter where you reside, in the pure lands
Of Yönten Kö, Ngayab Kunzang or elsewhere,
We invite you: come now to this place of offering.
jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
The guru dissolves into the deity, becoming indivisible.
Protector Amitāyus who bestows the splendour of immortality,
Lord among siddhas in the land of snows, Padmasambhava,
And Ngawang Namgyal, whose kindness is beyond compare,
Homage to you: grant the attainment of great bliss, I pray.
I present ocean-like clouds of outer, inner and secret offerings.
I confess all misdeeds and downfalls, physical, vocal and mental.
I rejoice in all the virtuous activity that you, protector, carry out.
So that you might turn the wheel of Vajrayāna Dharma,
Remain, I pray, for as long as space itself exists.
All my own positivity and all that is found in existence and peace,
I dedicate as a cause for attaining the level of great blissful union.
Amitāyus, who bestows the splendour of immortality and great bliss,
Padmasambhava, who attained the rainbow body of great bliss,
And Ngawang Namgyal, lord among the adepts of great bliss—
As you do not fail those who call out to you with intense devotion,
I pray to you now: dispel all obstacles and adversity!
Grant your blessings! Bestow the attainment of immortality!
Grant your blessings, that we may renounce the concerns of this life.
Grant your blessings, that we may attain the rainbow body, the kāya of light.
Grant your blessings, that all our interactions may be of benefit.
Grant your blessings, that the life of the sovereign may remain secure
And the power and prosperity of the state may increase.
You who attained the deathless vajra kāya,
Lotus Essence of Splendour,
I pray to you with intense devotion:
Grant me the attainment of a vidyādhara with power over life.
Hook-like rays of red light stream from the guru’s heart. They gather together and remove any constraints in our own and our patrons’ vitality and merit, which may have been stolen by others, dispersed, scattered, summoned, or suppressed.
They then dissolve into the long-life vase held by Amitāyus, the lord of the buddha family at our crown, the long-life vase that the guru holds, and the skull-cup held by the great master at his heart.
The amṛta boils over, enters my crown and flows through all my body’s subtle channels.
In addition, it enters the right nostril of any fortunate one for whom I am practising, who remains within their ordinary form within the vowel sign of the syllable hrīḥ within my heart.
It fills our bodies and restores and increases our vitality and merit—my own and those belonging to the objects of my practice.
It extends what was cut short and replenishes what was exhausted, and it causes us to obtain the sublime siddhi of deathless life.
Hook-like rays of red light stream out from the syllable hrīḥ and the mantra-garland at the guru’s heart.
They gather all the blessings of body, speech and mind and all the perfect power and strength of the peaceful and wrathful deities of the Three Roots, as well as all the riches of gods and human beings, including those of the most powerful humans of this world, such as the universal sovereign, and the mightiest devas of the desire and form realms, including Brahmā and Indra.
They gather them all in the form of red nectar and rays of light, which gently flow into the long-life vase and skull-cup held by Lord Amitāyus at my crown and the master at the guru’s heart.
These then boil over and enter my own central channel, while I visualize myself clearly as Hayagrīva, enter the right nostril of the object of practice at my heart, and fill his or her body.
Gradually, my own subtle channels and all the parts of my body fill with nectar, causing all the qualities of learning and realization, including longevity and merit, to increase and, for others’ sake, bringing attainment of the siddhi of longevity beyond birth and death.
oṃ āḥ guru vagindra-vijaya ayur-jñāna siddhi hūṃ
oṃ amaraṇi jīvantaye svāhā
Through the positivity and merit of this, may I swiftly
Attain the realization of the enlightened guru, and thereby
Every single sentient being
Reach his state of perfection too.
Guru and deity, inseparable in the three vajras—
May I swiftly attain the level of Ngawang Namgyal,
And through his great blessings, may I be inspired
To establish each and every being at the same level.
Through my excellent vision of the guru as Vajradhara,
The supreme source of all siddhis and great bliss,
And through my genuine and devoted service,
May I let go of attachment to the things of saṃsāra,
Stabilize loving kindness, compassion and bodhicitta,
And swiftly develop the sublime meditative absorption
In which generation and perfection are united.
Through the power of praying to you, the benevolent one,
May I devote my time, day and night, to the sacred Dharma,
And, as the supreme aid to authentic practice of the Dharma,
May the guru’s blessings infuse my mind.
May I never perceive the slightest fault
In the guru’s activity of body, speech and mind,
And through the great devotion that sees only qualities,
May I swiftly gain attainments, ordinary and supreme!
May all who see, hear or think of me, or connect with me in any way
Perceive, when their lives are at an end, glorious Ngawang Namgyal
Together with his retinue, whereupon
May the final words that they apprehend be:
Come now, child, let us proceed to Sukhāvatī!
May we perfectly realize within this very lifetime
The supreme vehicle taught by all the buddhas
And master every aspect of the two stages
Of the yidam deity, such as the glorious heruka,
Thereby establishing all beings in the great blissful sphere.
Glorious Ngawang Namgyal, precious one,
Inspire me to attain the level of an immortal vidyādhara.
Help me to purify all misdeeds and obscurations of body, speech and mind,
And grant me the blessings of your three secrets.
Lord Amitāyus enters the guru’s crown
And dissolves into the master Padmasambhava at his heart.
The guru himself then enters my own crown, while I clearly visualize myself as the heroic Hayagrīva,
And dissolves into the extremely subtle energy-mind within the sealed locket of the indestructible bindu at my heart, through which mind and wisdom merge as one.
Within the eight-petalled lotus at my heart, my mind suddenly arises as the guru’s form,
And I gain the sublime attainment of deathless union as a vidyādhara with power over life.
In all my lives, may I never be separated from the perfect guru,
And having benefited fully from the splendour of the Dharma,
May I perfect the qualities of the five paths and ten bhūmis,
And swiftly attain the sublime level of Vajradhara!
May the unique source of benefit and happiness for beings,
The precious teachings of the glorious Drukpa,
Flourish and spread throughout the whole of space and time,
And may all beings be liberated through skilful means.
In all lands in general and this country of Bhutan in particular
May even the names of disharmony and conflict be unknown,
May the reign of the sovereign remain secure,
And may citizens enjoy the splendour of tenfold virtue.
May the glorious heruka, noble Ngawang Namgyal,
Together with the hosts of root and lineage gurus,
Who rain down siddhis and all that is desirable,
As well as Four-armed Mahākāla and glorious Düsolma,
Bring about the auspiciousness of instantly accomplishing
All that is excellent in this and future lives.
This is an extremely profound instruction: Ithi .