A Liturgy for Transference: Enlightenment Without Meditation from The Heart-Essence of the Vast Expanse The Main Practice The Transference Prayer 'Inserting the Grass-stalk’ Prayer The Prayer from the Sky Dharma 6 Concluding the Session
I visualize myself clearly as Vajrayoginī. From the heart-centre of the guru a beam of light… 1
... and becomes one with him: one taste.
With your extraordinary compassion for ignorant beings,
Your extraordinary care for evil doers,
And your extraordinary skilful means in teaching those difficult to tame—
Unsurpassable guru, at your feet I pay homage!
Though unable to care for myself, I chant away in front of the deceased.
Though I do not practice, I unfurl the parasol of long-winded explanation.
Inspire fraudulent beings like me with your blessings
That we may find the determination to accomplish this practice! 2
oṃ mahā-śūnyatājñāna vajra-svabhāv-ātmako ‘ham
Āḥ. My entire perception, spontaneously perfect, is a realm of infinite purity,
The ‘Realm of Great Bliss’, arrayed in complete and perfect detail. Here, in its very centre,
My own body is Vajrayoginī,
With one face and two hands, brilliant red and holding a curved knife and skull,
My two feet gracefully poised, my three eyes gazing into the sky.
“In the middle of her body runs the central channel
As thick as a hollow reed arrow,
Empty and clear like a tube of light.
Its upper end is open at the brahma-aperture,
And its lower end extends below the navel centre.
Upon the knot at the heart-centre,
In the centre of a light green sphere of inner air 3
Awareness clearly appears as a red syllable Hrīḥ .
A forearm’s length above the crown of one’s head
Appears the Buddha Amitābha, ‘Limitless Light’, 4
Complete with all the major and minor marks.
Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, protector Amitābha, to you I pay homage!
To you I make offerings! In you I take refuge!
Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, Ratnaśikhin, to you I pay homage!
To you I make offerings! In you I take refuge!
Bodhisattva, great being, Noble Avalokiteśvara, to you I pay homage!
To you I make offerings! In you I take refuge!
Bodhisattva, great being, Noble Mahāsthāmaprāpta, to you I pay homage!
To you I make offerings! In you I take refuge!
Emaho!
In the self-appearing realm, the ultimate Akaniṣṭha,
Is an expanse that teems with rainbow light of intense devotion.
Here, the embodiment of all objects of refuge, one’s own root guru,
Not in ordinary form but with a body of light,
Abides as the essence of glorious Buddha Amitābha.
With intense devotion, we pray:
Inspire us to accomplish the path of transference!
Inspire us to reach the realm of Akaniṣṭha!
May we capture the domain of dharmakāya expanse!
Hrīḥ
Phaṭ
Hik
Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, protector Amitābha, to you I pay homage!
To you I make offerings! In you I take refuge!
Buddha Amitābha, I prostrate to you;
Padmasambhava of Uḍḍiyāna, I pray to you;
Kind root teacher, hold me with your compassion!
Root and lineage gurus, guide me along the path.
Inspire me to master the profound path of transference.
Inspire me to take this short path of transference to a celestial realm.
Inspire me and others, so that as soon as this life is over,
We may take rebirth in the realm of Sukhāvatī!
Hrīḥ
Phaṭ
Hik
Bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, protector Amitābha, to you I pay homage!
To you I make offerings! In you I take refuge!
Emaho! Most wondrous protector Amitābha,
Great Compassionate One and Vajrapāṇi-Mahāsthāmaprāpta, 7
For myself and others I pray to you one-pointedly:
Inspire us to master the profound path of transference.
When it comes time for us to die,
Inspire us with your blessings, so that our consciousness may be transferred to the realm of Great Bliss!
Hrīḥ
Phaṭ
Hik
phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ
Then, the form of Amitābha
Melts into light and dissolves into me.
Through that, I too become Amitāyus,
Perfect in the very instant of recollection.
oṃ guru āyusiddhi hūṃ | oṃ amaraṇi jīvantaye svāhā
oṃ namo bhagavate aparimitāyur-jñāna-suviniścita-tejo-rājāya tathāgatāya arhate samyak saṃbuddhāya | tadyathā | oṃ puṇye puṇye mahā-puṇye 'parimita-puṇye 'parimita-puṇya-jñāna-saṃbhāropacite | oṃ sarva-saṃskāra-pariśuddhe dharmate gagana-samudgate svabhāva-viśuddhe mahā-naya-parivāre svāhā |
When signs of untimely death arise
May we immediately behold a clear vision
Of our protector Amitāyus, vanquish the Lord of Death
And swiftly attain the level of an immortal vidyādhara!
In all our lives, may we be cared for by Amitāyus
Manifesting in our lives as a spiritual friend of the Great Vehicle.
Through their power, may we never turn away, even for an instant,
From the excellent path that is praised by the victorious ones.
Through this merit, may I and all sentient beings
Vanquish the four māras such as the Lord of Death.
Having crossed the great ocean of birth, old age, sickness and death,
May we attain the level of the protector Amitāyus!
Glorious root guru, precious one..
May all beings attain buddhahood together, as one!