Supplication to Lord Mila Shepa Dorje
I and all beings throughout space,
Until our own enlightenment is won,
Respectfully turn for refuge
To the hosts of gurus who are sources of protection.
We generate the supreme attitude —
Wishing that all beings throughout existence, our very own mothers,
May swiftly achieve unsurpassable awakening.
Grasping at my own ordinary form and appearance dissolves into the natural state,
And, as the unobstructed self-radiance of suchness, I appear clearly as the yoginī.
In the space above my head, upon a lotus and moon,
Is the guru of unrepayable kindness, Shepa Dorje.
Radiant blue, and dressed in a white cotton robe.
He shows the gesture of meditation as he gazes into space.
His form is apparent yet empty, and he sits in the bodhisattva posture.
Hosts of gurus from infinite realms gather around like clouds,
As he presides amidst an oceanic assembly of ḍākinīs.
Essence of the buddhas of the three times,
Source of the sublime Dharma of non-attachment,
Supreme among the saṅgha of knowledge and freedom;
You in whom the threefold refuge is complete:
Kindly Shepa Dorje, care for me!
Embodiment of all refuge-granting gurus,
Essence of all awakened yidam deities,
And supreme lord of oceanic hosts of ḍākinīs;
You in whom the three-root deities are complete:
Kindly Shepa Dorje, care for me!
Crown ornament of the Kagyü teachings,
Lord of the ear-whispered secret path,
Skilfully maturing and liberating the fortunate;
You who guide all beings throughout space:
Kindly Shepa Dorje, care for me!
In this and all my future lives,
I have no other hope or refuge but you.
Pray, hold me in your compassion, and, lordly master, care for me!
Bestow the supreme empowerment of your form upon my body,
And bless me to accomplish the immutable rainbow body.
Cause the supreme empowerment of your voice to enter my speech,
And bless me to accomplish the ceaseless unity of sound-emptiness.
Bestow the supreme empowerment of your wisdom upon my mind,
And bless me to realize the dharmakāya of empty-awareness.
Finally, the lordly master dissolves into light
And becomes inseparable from the nature of my awareness:
The self-liberation of the ground within the expanse of dharmakāya: Āḥ.