The Lightning Band of Faith
A Song to Invoke the Master’s Wisdom Mind
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Aho!
In the blessed place, the glorious mountain of Cāmara,
You, precious Guru, father who embodies all Three Roots,
Are surrounded by a vast retinue of vidyādharas and siddhas.
I, your devoted son, call out to you in prayer. 
This modern world is like a city of cannibal demons.[1]
Every day reveals the nature of impermanence.
While everybody acts as if confused as to what is right and wrong,
And disdains the teachings of the precious Sage.
Assailed by the uncivilized, barbaric forces of darkness,
All dharma practitioners have had their lives destroyed.
The welfare of the teachings and beings has been plundered,
All the sublime supports of splendour and merit have been ruined.
And pernicious demons and spirits have taken charge,
As a result of which, we’re beset by all manner of difficulties. 
In times such as these, Orgyen, may you watch over us!
As we call out to you, Lord Padmākara, in heartfelt prayer,
Unleash the full force of your mighty strength and compassion.
Dispel all adverse circumstances, we pray! 
Padmasambhava, sole sufficient refuge of this vast land
Of Tibet, surrounded by snowy peaks, care for us!
We have no other source of hope but you, O lord,
Inspire us with your blessings, here and now! 
Written on the 25th day of the black (i.e., third) month of the Fire Dog year.
| Translated by Adam Pearcey 2021, with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Terton Sogyal Trust.

Bibliography
Tibetan Editions
'jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. gsung thor bu/_'jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros/ (rgya gar bir'i par ma/). TBRC W21814. 2 vols. null: null, null. Vol. 2: 134–135
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "thugs dam rgyud bskul gyi glu dad pa'i glog zhags/" in 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986. Vol. 8: 458–459

Version: 1.0-20211014




Following two-volume gsung thor bu edition and reading srin po rather than the srid po of the twelve-volume edition.  ↩